Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 6-7,

1993

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the
offices

of the Board of Governors of the Federal

Washington, D.C.,

on Tuesday, July 6,

on Wednesday. July 7.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

1993,

1993,

at

Reserve System in

2:30 p.m. and continued

at 9:00 a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
Mullins 1/
Angell
Boehne
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
McTeer
Oltman 2/
Phillips
Stern

Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal. and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,
Simpson, and Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough. Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations
1/

Acting Vice Chairman in Mr. Corrigan's absence.

2/

First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, attending as
alternate member for Mr. Corrigan.

Mr.

Madigan. Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs. Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton. Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Danker, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Small. 2/ and Whitesell, 1/ Section Chiefs,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Kusko, 3/ Senior Economist, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant.
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Beebe. J. Davis, T. Davis, Goodfriend, and
Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Cleveland,
Kansas City, Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston,
Messrs. Coughlin and Guentner. Assistant Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and New York,
respectively

2/

Attended portion of meeting relating to a discussion of the uses
of a broad monetary aggregate that includes bond and stock mutual
funds.

1/

Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion
of the economic outlook and its longer-run growth objectives for
monetary and debt aggregates.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
July 6, 1993
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The staff has circulated a memorandum
[on a monetary aggregate that includes bond and stock mutual funds]
and I assume you've all read it. Nonetheless, it would be useful for
us to have a broad overview from Ms. Danker.
MS. DANKER.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Ms. Danker?

MR. BOEHNE. What are the data gathering costs involved with
having something like M2+ [unintelligible].
MS. DANKER. Well, most of the data gathering costs are
incurred by the investment companies that provide us with the mutual
funds data. We have access to these data entirely through the ICI at
this point.
If we want to enhance the quality of those data
considerably, that entails at the first level dealing with ICI and
convincing them that that would be a good idea or convincing them to
let us deal with the funds one-on-one in terms of editing the data.
There are, of course, alternatives--vendors that sell these data. But
the ICI seems to have the best series on an aggregate basis.
MR. KOHN. We, of course, have no legal authority to force
the mutual funds to report to us.
It's not like the deposit data used
to calculate reserve requirements. We have worked with the ICI in
setting up their weekly data series--they consulted with us last
summer about that--and on the money market funds data.
They are torn;
they would like to have data; they want to be cooperative. On the
other hand, they don't want to put burdens on their membership. It is
entirely voluntary and they hear a lot of complaining from their
members if they call them excessively to clear up data anomalies. So,
there's quite a bit of tension on this score with Board staff and ICI
staff even on the money market funds data.
MR. PARRY. Are they going to an end-of-week collection
anyway, independent of our prodding? Don't they now have end-of-month
data?
MR. KOHN. Well, they had an experimental process under way
to collect a weekly series on the bond and stock mutual funds.
MR. PARRY.
MR. KOHN.
MR. PARRY.
improvement.

But that's not a daily average?
No, it's not;

it's still a one-day number.

And they plan to do it now, so that would be some

MR. KOHN. Yes, absolutely. Still, there's the issue of
checking the data, looking for anomalies, calling the funds back and
so forth, and there's not a lot of appetite for that.
Now, maybe one
thing we could do is to help subsidize them if that were a problem.
But I think the problem is more the tension; they don't [want to]
involve their members too much.

7/6-7/93

MR. SYRON. I happened to talk to about five people in the
funds industry recently; I was doing it coincidentally. I raised the
question of how they feel about this; this was after we got the memo.
Two points:
One is--these were economists from the funds--that they
thought the idea was crazy in the first place. But beyond that, even
if they were in favor of it, they expected they would have a lot of
internal difficulty with their data processing people [at a time] when
they are trying to cut costs; they thought it would be quite
difficult. Then, they raised several technical questions about things
we'd have to do. There's a lot of concern about this, including not
having any theoretical foundation. Also, what is set as the boundary
for what to include and not include that's spendable?
But beyond that
this would be a new venture for us, using data that we don't really
control in some sense.
MR. KOHN. We do have the money market funds data already in
M2 but it's a very small piece.
MR. SYRON. But even on a practical level, independent of
what one thinks is the value of this--which I personally think is
questionable--it would be quite difficult.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you getting an impression from them
that they would be quite concerned about their numbers becoming part
of policymaking and then having the Congress require them to do
something?
MR. SYRON.

Exactly.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, are we getting an objective
appraisal of their view of the difficulty of getting the data?
There has been all this
MR. SYRON. No, probably not.
discussion as to whether they should be included in the CRA
legislation and that sort of thing, so they have become very, very
nervous about any step they see that makes their liabilities closer to
being money assets.

I wouldn't be surprised, say, in the case of

that it would become quite difficult because
the
fellow who runs it--John LaWare can tell you--can be a feisty guy.
They might just refuse to do it because they're very, very worried
about being seen as a [depository] institution.
MR. PARRY. Well, in addition to that, we don't exactly have
the strongest case that could be made for a need for it! As the study
indicated, [M2+] really does have some significant limitations.
I think the only plausible possibility
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
is to publish it for a limited period of time on an experimental
basis. But if that's not possible or is too difficult or has the
as you would say, there isn't much [promise] there.
I thought Debbie Danker was more forthcoming toward this in her oral
comments than in earlier versions [of the memo that] I read. This is
very difficult to pick up without asbestos gloves!
MR. BROADDUS.
It's hard for me to think that this measure
would ever be very useful operationally given the changing asset
values that will affect it.
That's just a fundamental conceptual
problem for me. I'd like to ask Debbie:
Have you all thought about

7/6-7/93

doing anything like shift adjusting this, using inflow data--the way
we dealt with M1 for a period back in the early 1980s--as opposed to
You would still have data problems and some
using the stock concept?
other difficulties, but at least you'd get rid of that major
conceptual issue.
MS. DANKER. I think the data on the inflows--rather than
formally shift adjusting the aggregate--are very helpful in looking at
the developments in M2 and in figuring out how it's [behaving] vis-avis its path. The Feinman/Porter work last year looked at using an
aggregate that just cumulated the inflows. But that's not very
satisfying when viewing it in terms of an aggregate and one thinks of
the capital gains that occurred 10 years ago not counting as money
today. But on a shorter-term basis thinking about inflows as some
kind of shift adjustment I think can be helpful.
MR. KOHN. The problem is that if we just do that, the
outflows could exceed the inflows because of that capital gain that
people are taking out and we could have a very funny looking [number].
But we could use the inflow data to help analyze M2 rather than trying
to build an artificial aggregate that doesn't have capital gains.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't really. What were the gross
flows we used in M1 early on? I guess I'm not quite clear what you're
saying.
MR. BROADDUS. Well, we did a formal shift adjustment of the
M1 aggregate to take out-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BROADDUS.
MR. KOHN.

A one-shot thing?

Yes.

That was when the NOW accounts were authorized.

MR. BROADDUS.

Right.

That's what I was thinking about.

MR. KOHN. We did surveys of consumers and did micro analyses
of banks to see what was happening between NOW accounts and other
accounts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, but that's a one-shot sort of

thing.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Using growth figures with stock data can
I don't see how one can do it.
get very difficult.
MR. LINDSEY. Conceptually, why does that differ? People
couldn't write a check against the capital gains of 10 years ago, to
use your phrase. They can now. Isn't it really the innovation, the
nature of the consumer product, that has made us more suspicious that
this is M2-related? So [why] wouldn't a stock-adjustment-type
[process] or looking just at flows be appropriate?
MS. DANKER. Well, if you think of it as a stock adjustment
process, it's going to be over after some period of time and this

7/6-7/93

isn't a brave new world or something like that.
So, maybe we'd just
want to shift adjust it for a while. There has been an explosion in
bank offerings of mutual funds that might make that appropriate.
I
don't know that we get a sense of there having been a discrete step so
much as a somewhat more gradual broadening of assets.
MR. LINDSEY. But, again, to use the analogy of the capital
gains that happened 10 years ago, [then] I may have been in that fund
for reasons other than liquidity reasons whereas today I might put
money in that fund for more liquidity oriented motives. That in my
mind would be a reason for counting the flows in today or stock
adjusting at some point. I agree with you that it is not a step
function, but clearly the product is different today than it was 10
years ago, and some kind of adjustment might be [appropriate].
MR. PRELL. I don't think it's clear that the product is that
much different from the perception of the investor; it's how he is
really using it.
Transactions, turnover kinds of measures, are not
particularly high. Indeed, they are for many people a substitute for
a time deposit or a very dormant kind of savings account as opposed to
a transaction vehicle. Transactions are clumsy out of the mutual
funds that have capital gains and losses because of the complicated
I don't think there is
tax accounting one has to do if nothing else.
strong evidence that these are liquidity so much as investment
holdings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I have a couple of conceptual problems that
relate to what Larry and Mike were just discussing. One has to be
very careful about the distinction between the value of a dollar and
the value of assets denominated in dollars. Even if we have no net
inflows, if we have an environment where we're stabilizing the
purchasing power of the dollar and the inflation premium and interest
rates are coming down, we can have a capital gains that would indicate
policy is expansionary when in fact it is anti-inflationary and the
reverse. If we got into a period where people expected the value of
the dollar to decline and interest rates to rise, the value of these
funds would fall, indicating policy is restrictive. The comment about
it being an accurate picture of the thrust of policy comes from
relating it to nominal GDP. But if the Committee is accepting
stabilizing the purchasing power of the dollar as its objective, we
measure policy as a central bank from that objective--not targeting
GDP but stabilizing the purchasing power of the dollar and not assets
denominated in dollars.
MR. KOHN. I think that over time the two wouldn't be that
much different.
I would assert that the capital gains and losses
would make it a not very good predictor of nominal GDP. It's partly
fortuitous events--the changing way people react to the yield curve
and the accessibility--that have made this velocity relatively
constant over the last few years, and we can't really count on that.
MR. JORDAN.
problem with it.

I agree.

But even if it were, I'd have a

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have any evidence that suggests
there is a partial inverse relationship between stock prices and M2?

7/6-7/93

-5-

MR. KOHN. We do have the bond yields in the sense that we've
put yield curve variables in our M2 equations. And when bond yields
go up and the yield curve steepens, then we tend to get flows-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm asking whether in fact capital gains
in stock funds or funds generally are substitutable for depository
funds?
MR. KOHN. My guess is we just don't have enough experience
with that. That's basically what this aggregate-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I'm raising a broader question.
We have the wealth effect occurring on savings, and a more general
question is whether M2 is inversely affected by the level of stock
prices.

MR. KOHN. I'm not sure. We had a huge runup in stock prices
in '86 and '87 and we didn't notice much of a shortfall in M2 growth.
When stock prices came down--the crash of '87--we had a little surge
into M2.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What happened in 1987 would be extreme
evidence of it.
If you couldn't find a lot there, you're not going to
find a little any other time.
MR. KOHN. The stock market is an alternative repository for
savings. And peoples' expectations about future returns in the stock
market will affect their assessment of what they're going to get out
So, there's going to be
of a time deposit versus [the stock market].
some relationship. But I would doubt that it's very strong.
MR. JORDAN. Your question implies a reversal of the signs
because traditionally we would have said that wealth enters the demand
function positively, but you're suggesting that this is a substitution
effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
discussion.
MR. JORDAN.

Well, that's implicit in this

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's curious that there's not the right
evidence that would confirm that.
MR. JORDAN.
framework.

It certainly goes against our theoretical

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions or comments? Let me
ask a more general question. Does anybody think we should do other
than Option 1--that is, nothing? Option 1 is just to leave it alone
for the moment and look at it.
Does anyone have a proactive view as
to our even publishing it, not to mention going to targeting it?
MR. MULLINS. I wouldn't say my view is to be proactive, but
I'd at least not be comatose exactly. Obviously, there is strong
evidence that these [accounts] are substitutes for time deposits and
CDs since one can observe people carting large sums of money from time
deposits and CDs into these instruments.
And it is true that it's

7/6-7/93

available to spend in the same sense as a time deposit, which is the
logic of CDs.
The basic advantage of not simply ignoring all this is
that it provides some empirical content to the velocity story, which
[per se] sounds a bit like a tautology or a bit artificial. Now, we
haven't received a lot of flak lately so maybe we've been successful
with that story and that's why I don't think [a new measure] is so
important.
I do think it's instructive to show these flows to people.
I don't think we should anoint M2+ even as an experimental new
monetary aggregate. I suspect were we to do so it would promptly blow
up on us.
But it is nice to point to something that is growing!
[Laughter]
And it illustrates what is going on; it's the story that
we're giving behind the increase in velocity. I personally don't like
calling it M2+; in my view that goes a little toward saying we're
thinking about [using] this. But regularly making these flows public
in some way would be helpful, although it seems to me that six months
ago we had a much more contentious situation with respect to M2
growth, and the evidence from '92 clearly supported the distortion in
the relationship between M2 and GDP growth. So maybe it's less of an
issue-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You mean there's evidence in '93 as

well.
MR. MULLINS. Yes, in '93 as well. But it seems to me the
steam came out of the argument, really, with the fourth-quarter 1992
numbers. We were getting pounded regularly on this M2 growth topic
and after that period--when all the data were in for 1992--it seems to
me that it hasn't been an especially big issue. So, maybe it would be
okay simply to do nothing, and I wouldn't bother the mutual funds.
I
do think it would be useful to provide the data at least for some
period of time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

We can publish part of it.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We can just add it to one of the monthly

releases.
MR. MULLINS.

There are two ways we could do it.

MR. SYRON. The Board might want to publish it in the
If we put it in the release it
Bulletin rather than as a release.
does start to look as if we're thinking about it for the money supply.
MR. KOHN. There are a number of alternatives that the Board
could contemplate in terms of publishing this, including just making
it available on an informal basis to researchers [and others] who
call. We did include a chart of the flows in the Humphrey-Hawkins
report last time--in the back where only the aficionados look--and we
can certainly continue to do that.
MR. MULLINS. One could call it M2 plus the flows to stocks
and bonds and mutual funds.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

7/6-7/93

-7-

MR. MULLINS.
I don't like the idea of having a new label.
Another option is to have M2 and just publish the flows to the funds
and then people could do the calculation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You're taking about flows rather than

stocks?
MR. MULLINS.

Yes.

MS. PHILLIPS. Could I ask a question?
that are included in M2 indexed in any way?
MR. KOHN.

Are any of the CDs

I think there are a few.

MS. PHILLIPS.

Any with equity?

MR. KOHN. Institutions have offered them from time to time.
I think it's a very, very small amount.
MS. PHILLIPS.
SPEAKER(?).

With equity?
Citicorp.

MS. DANKER. The only thing we subtract out of those are
foreign currency denominated [assets].
MS. PHILLIPS.
MR. KOHN.

So we already have a piece in the CDs?

But it's minuscule.

MR. STERN. Don't those tend to have some sort of guaranteed
component so we don't necessarily get big changes in net asset values?
SPEAKER(?).

No.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I was just going to raise a general question.
Is there a case to be made for doing some more generalized work in
terms of household portfolio behavior?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think we're going to be doing that

anyway.
MR. MELZER. One of the things that's not particularly
satisfying about this is that we're only capturing a piece of that
total picture. If we're willing to commit resources to do more work,
I'd be in favor of committing them more broadly and looking at that
basic question of household portfolio behavior.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me ask this:
Can I just get a
general show of hands of those who would prefer that we publish
nothing official, other than to include something in the HumphreyHawkins report periodically?
The next question would be:
Do we want
to elevate it and put something special in the Federal Reserve
Bulletin beyond that? So, who would prefer to do nothing more than
we've been doing at this particular stage?
[Secretary's note: Nearly
all hands were raised.]
Offhand it looks as if a majority prefer to

7/6-7/93

I think what
do nothing. Why don't we just keep an eye on it.
happened is that Debbie's memo soured a lot of views on the usefulness
of some of this.
I think the worst thing that can happen, if we start
to focus on this, is that it may fall off the cliff, as Governor
Mullins suggested. But we can keep the issue open and if at a future
Committee meeting we want to change-MR. KOHN. One addendum, Mr. Chairman. To the extent that
members of the Committee are aware of people at their own Banks or
also people outside who are doing research on this issue, we'd be glad
to share our data.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
unofficially.
MR. MULLINS.

Oh, yes.

That's what we're doing now

Where are the data available currently?

MR. KOHN. Well, we've sort of put together a series. We're
[Laughter]
That wasn't fair. The ICI
almost a troubleshooter!
publishes monthly data. We've been trying to adjust them to take out
the IRA/Keough accounts, to separate the [holdings of] institutions
from [those of] non-institutions, and generally to put them more on an
M2-type basis in terms of trying to put together a data series that is
a little more comparable with the concepts-MR. MULLINS. How much difference is there between our
internal version and the ICI version?
MR. KOHN.

In dollar terms?

MR. MULLINS.

Does it give a really different picture?

MR. KOHN. I doubt it but I'm not 100 percent certain since I
think those things move pretty slowly. On some of these we only have
once-a-year data, the level on December 31st. So, we just smooth
between two December 31sts.
MS. DANKER. For example, the aggregate value of these things
is about a trillion dollars, but only about half of that will show up
in M2+ because of the institutional and IRA/Keough accounts.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, shall we move on?
Desk is next on the agenda. Mr. McDonough.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

The Foreign

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First, are there questions?

MR. BOEHNE. In these joint discussions with the Treasury,
which side do you think had more enthusiasm for the intervention?
MR. MCDONOUGH. If you were to ask which side had less
enthusiasm, the answer would clearly be ours.
I don't think
had enormous enthusiasm
either. Rather, there was the notion that with the cacophony of
official statements, it had just become so confusing as to what the
policy was that some clarification once again was in order.

-9-

7/6-7/93

MR. BOEHNE.

And was there some attempt within the

Administration to try to reduce all those voices out there talking
about the yen?
MR. MCDONOUGH. Yes, I think so. We were promised that there
would be an effort. And I think if you look at what has not been
happening, including in the first 24 hours or so of the Summit in
Tokyo, the silence is remarkable.
MR. TRUMAN. President Boehne, I think there are two points
to be made on this. One is that, clearly, the Administration has not
gotten itself into the position of saying they don't want the yen to
appreciate further. That's going too far in terms of all the irons
they have in the fire. So, they are somewhat exposed inevitably.
But, for example, when they lifted one of the veils--I guess that's
the right way to put it--around the proposals for this framework
discussion, they had already
who
were involved that [unintelligible].
I was told one story about
[someone] who got up to answer a question at the press conference; the
question was not on the yen but he gave the yen answer as part of this
discussion. So, I think at least
to try to keep it out [unintelligible].
Obviously, the
central players-MR. MCDONOUGH.

They got their stories straight.

MR. LINDSEY. What are your bets on what the market will do
after the Japanese elections on the 18th?
MR. MCDONOUGH. If you assume that the likely outcome is a
very uneasy coalition, I think there's a fairly decent chance that the
dollar would strengthen a little. But the single most important
aspect is that the fundamentals, with that tremendous current account
and even bigger trade account surplus, point toward a gradually
strengthening yen and a weakening dollar. And we don't have the
conviction, as I mentioned, about a stronger dollar against the
From what we can see of the more speculative
European currencies.
players, they find the yen situation sufficiently confusing that
they'd rather go and play somewhere else where they can figure out the
odds better.
MR. LINDSEY.
the market right now?

So, a weak government is pretty much built into

MR. MCDONOUGH.

Yes.

The market assumes the weak coalition.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If that happens, it means the market
could remain unchanged or go in the other direction.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions?

If not, would

somebody like to move to ratify the transactions undertaken since the
last meeting?
MR. KELLEY.

So moved.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is

there a second?

-10-

7/6-7/93

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
the Domestic Desk and Joan Lovett.
MS. LOVETT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Let's move now to
[Statement--see

Messrs. Prell and Truman.

MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We've distributed to
all of you a package of charts labeled "Staff Presentation to the
FOMC."
[Statements--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. May I just ask for a
clarification on Chart 9, showing automotive products as a share of
domestic absorption? That includes parts and that's the reason why
the numbers are-tires.

MR. TRUMAN. That includes the measure for parts excluding
We figured that was what people counted too much!
MR. KELLEY.

MR. LINDSEY.
compensation?

I'm glad you asked!
[You said]

"workers' comp."

That's workmen's

MR. PRELL. For political correctness reasons, it's now
called "workers'" compensation. I knew it would cause confusion.
was tempted to say "workmen's" compensation, but I didn't!

I

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is happening to all the statutes!
Questions?
President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. With regard to this analysis that you did on
inflation and what you had at least in the written report of the
briefing to the Board last Friday:
The speed effects as I interpret
them really say we have to look not just at static comparisons of
unemployment versus inflation but also the kinds of changes that are
being made. If you look back over the post-World War II period, there
has been a tendency over those years for inflation, when it escalates,
to escalate from cycle to cycle. We've also had examples in the 1950s
and again in the 1980s of disinflation from cycle to cycle so that on
the upside of these cycles we end up with peaks in the later cycle
being higher than the previous cycle. The same [is true] for the
floors; when inflation de-escalates, we make progress from cycle to
cycle. One question is whether that is just a variation of the socalled speed effect. If there is something to this speed effect or
the cycle-to-cycle kind of phenomenon, should it be so strange that as
cycles mature there ought to be times during those cycles when we make
more progress against inflation where things flatten out?
If you look
at it from cycle to cycle, what we want to do is to keep inflation
from escalating so that in a subsequent cycle we can keep bringing the
rate of inflation down. My question is:
How much have you looked at
this cycle-to-cycle phenomenon?
It does strike me that it is part of
this dynamic or speed approach to looking at inflation.

7/6-7/93

-11-

MR. PRELL.
I guess in the abstract I don't view this speed
effect as relating to the kind of phenomenon I think you're talking
about. The effect should in essence wash out over the course of the
cycle as you get back to the same unemployment rate level.
You've
gotten the bad part on one side and the good part on the other side of
that cyclical movement. But I suspect what has been more at work over
the postwar period has been a gradual, and at some points maybe not so
gradual, escalation of inflation expectations, which have gotten
rather deeply embedded and have not been reversed from cycle to cycle.
And as we attempted to move the economy back to higher levels of
employment through macro policy, taken as a sort of base is this
higher level of inflation expectations. We don't seem to be headed
into this pattern this time where over a long period of time now there
has been a lower inflation. I think we've made some progress in
lowering inflation expectations from what prevailed a decade or a
decade and a half ago. I think such expectations are the more
critical element probably in this movement to higher inflation levels
from cycle to cycle. But I don't think we've really investigated
things in that particular cyclical context.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mike, on Chart 12, referring to the household
sector, down in the lower right corner you have the cash flow burden
and the fixed-rate mortgage is shown.
But I wonder if you have it for
all consumer debt?
MR. PRELL. Obviously, the nomenclature here has misled you.
This is the cash flow burden of owning a home:
How much the monthly
payment on a home is relative to disposable income. What we plotted
here is a new home, constant quality price measure, and a current
So, this is what it would cost to buy a home
fixed-rate mortgage.
today, setting aside issues of the down payment. And the down
payment, as I noted, seems to be a big hurdle for a large segment of
the population, particularly the younger group; relative wages have
not worked to their advantage in recent years. If you're looking at
debt service burdens in general-MR. KELLEY.

Yes.

MR. PRELL. We've seen a significant decline in those burdens
over the course of the last few years; debt has grown less rapidly,
interest rates have come down, and refinancing opportunities have
opened up. We're not expecting quite that rate of improvement but
there may be some room for that in our forecast largely through the
rollover of debt into lower rate loans. Debt growth in this forecast
is certainly keeping pace with income in the household sector.
MR. KELLEY. How far is that overall debt service level still
above what one might call the "norm" back a few years ago, maybe in
the '70s?
MR. PRELL. Well, it's certainly back down a considerable way
relative to the mid-1980s. To go back much further than that we can
look at the table in the Greenbook, page 11-2.
MR. KELLEY.

I'm sorry I missed it.

Okay.

7/6-7/93

-12-

MR. PRELL. As you can see, we're still above, by at least a
small margin, the levels that we had through the '60s and '70s.
MR. KELLEY.

That's what I was looking for, thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. A theoretical question on sacrifice ratio, which
supports the question about speed effects:
Would that necessarily
wash out over the cycle, depending upon how quickly the economy
accelerated and decelerated, or is it [not] neutral in a sense?
One
can conceive of patterns in which it wouldn't be neutral.
MR. PRELL. My colleagues can correct me, but I think
mechanically as one conceives of this model it will wash out as we
move back to the initial level of unemployment. Now, there could be
problems that arise as inflation expectations build so that a dynamic
process is created here that works against us. But in terms of just
isolating this conceptually, it should be no net effect.
MR. SYRON. What are your thoughts on the sacrifice ratio
now, given what we're seeing on inflation expectations?
MR. PRELL. That is very hard to judge and even difficult to
characterize in our forecast because the sacrifice ratio is a sort of
net effect observed ex post. Ex ante one can think about what the
slack effect in the model should be and then one can parcel all these
things out.
Our past experience is, as we noted, that in the first
stage of this disinflation we seemed to be getting unusually good
tradeoffs.
It was well below the traditional two-to-one rule of
thumb. In the recent period, we've been getting either nothing or
very little, depending on how one dates this.
On average, it hasn't
been much of a departure from our rough rule of thumb. But, indeed,
this may be a reflection of the speed effects, which worked favorably
through at least a good part of 1992 as unemployment was rising. It
has been working against us more recently.
MR. SYRON. It could be a very long distributive kind of
function on people's expectations. And as we get down toward [price
stability] it could be that the portion of people in the labor force
who remember the '50s level of inflation as compared to those who
think that 3 percent is favorable has diminished.
[That would have]
unfavorable implications in terms of the sacrifice ratio. Maybe
people think inflation can get only so low.
MR. PRELL. Well, that is probably one of the elements of the
stickiness of inflation expectations that we've seen. I think we're
clearly a long way from breaking through that barrier.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the speed effect, if you were using
the "seasonally adjusted" seasonally adjusted CPI, would that have any
effect on the slope of this chart or the correlation coefficients in
it?
MR. PRELL. Well, I seriously doubt it, given that we're
looking at some annual numbers over a long period of time. I don't
think that would have a great [effect].

-13-

7/6-7/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm sorry, these are annual numbers?

You're looking at the middle panel, the scatter

MR. PRELL.
diagram?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

Those are annual numbers?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Oh, I'm sorry.

MR. PRELL. I'm sorry. That really is poorly labeled.
30-odd years of data; it goes from 1960 to 1992.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It is

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mike, Chart 13, the capital-labor cost ratio,
is an exciting chart, if I'm reading it correctly. I don't know if I
am or not.
MR. PRELL.

I hope we calculated it correctly!

[Laughter]

MR. LINDSEY.
If I interpret this correctly, between '88 and
'94, say, the relative price of capital, the user cost of capital, has

fallen 40 percent relative to the wage rate, roughly.
correctly?
MR. PRELL.

Am I reading it

Yes.

MR. LINDSEY.
MR. PRELL.

Do you have an historic series on this?
Yes, we can provide you with a longer time

series.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. PRELL.

Is this an unusual amount of change?
The computer prices have been falling fast for so

long that if we stretched this back--at least going back to the '70s-I think we'd probably still have a pretty steep drop.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PRELL.

But the rates have changed.

Yes, it may be more in recent years.

MR. LINDSEY. If you're talking about computer prices, okay.
But when you use cost of capital, there are some tax effects and
interest rates and weighted cost of equity and debt and things like
that in there. And the compensation rate is something like an hourly
wage rate?
MR. PRELL.
MR. LINDSEY.

Yes, we've used the ECI here.
And this has been falling like that since the

'70s?
MR. PRELL. Well, undoubtedly, you [have to] go back to a
period when interest rates were moving sharply enough to have
significantly moved this.

7/6-7/93

-14-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The computer prices are falling now at
rates that are very large; and when you consider the size of the
computer industry itself there is [unintelligible] effect
[unintelligible] earlier period.
MR. PRELL.
Certainly, this would be the case going back
several years before this, but I don't have data going back much
earlier.
MR. SYRON. This would forecast a real investment boom over a
long period of time.
MR. LINDSEY.

Well, it also forecasts problems in the labor

market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what part of it is.

MR. LINDSEY. That's a part of it, but what's the good rule
of thumb for cross elasticity substitution?
MR. PRELL.
SPEAKER(?).

I can't answer that.
Fudge!

MR. LINDSEY. Even a tiny number there when you've got a 40
percent decline is going to knock a heck of a lot off employment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
equipment numbers are low.
MR. LINDSEY.

It explains a good deal;

They are, yes.

My heavens!

the plant and

Thank you.

I have a chart on the growth rate of the cost of
MR. PRELL.
capital and it clearly has been falling on average since the beginning
of the 1980s expansion. There were a few periods when there was some
increase but we have seen a significant decline over time. It is
faster in this period than it was earlier by a significant margin.
MR. LINDSEY. When the crush is off, you can send me a copy.
I would appreciate it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the interesting inferences from
these data is that depreciation charges currently coming on are coming
off equipment from 5 and 6 years ago when the prices were much higher.
MR. LINDSEY.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

So, the cash flow is very large relative

to-MR. ANGELL.

To the investment.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So incentives--. It's a fascinating
process in many different ways that we're looking at. And that's why
the capital goods markets are-MR. ANGELL.
robust!

And lo and behold the credit demands are not

-15-

7/6-7/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.
question.

Exactly.

Because the internal flows--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.

The cash flows are very large, no

MR. PARRY. Mike, I have two questions. The first is on the
measurement problems issue.
I wonder if you could talk about that
just a little.
I know there's a discussion in Part II of the
Greenbook and I'm not sure exactly how this problem originates. Is
each of the series seasonally adjusted except those series where there
apparently is not a statistically significant seasonal adjustment
factor? And then is it added and the combined unadjusted apparently
has a seasonal factor?
MR. PRELL. That's right. As I understand it, BLS does not
like to use seasonally adjusted sub-components unless at a more
detailed level there are indications of seasonality in them. If they
can't find it at the very detailed level, they won't do it for that
major sub-component of the CPI. And most of this residual seasonality
appears to be in the not seasonally adjusted components of the index.
MR. PARRY.
the entire series?

So, at the end is there a seasonal adjustment of

MR. PRELL.
components.

No, it's an aggregation of seasonally adjusted

MR. PARRY. Okay. So, it's almost like a deflator that they
see when they publish that.
There is a number which is called the
index [unintelligible] implicit.
MESSRS. KOHN and PRELL.
MR. PARRY.

The weighted average.

The weighted average, okay.

MR. PRELL. One of the things BLS has pointed out and which
gave us pause--we thought about this some months ago in terms of
whether we should expect something--is that it is hard to find at a
detailed level a consistent pattern in recent years. Certain
commodity groups were behaving in a way that suggested there was a
seasonal problem. One year it was one thing and another year it was
another, and that gave us pause. But the accumulation of evidence now
certainly shows, at least at a statistical level, that there's
something going on there. As I said, it doesn't explain everything.
The best you can get out of this is that the pattern this year looks
much like the pattern last year.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

MR. PRELL. The question is: Why [isn't] the pattern this
year better than the pattern last year, given the ongoing slack in the
economy?
MR. PARRY. My other question is:
In Part I of the
Greenbook, and you also referred to it here, you have a table on the
relationship between tax increases and expenditure cuts, and for 1994

7/6-7/93

-16-

it's rather interesting. Will it be possible at some time in the
future to get that out through the entire program?
It would be rather
interesting-MR. PRELL. Certainly. When they pass [some legislation],
then we can do something similar. Let me just say-MR. PARRY. It's very interesting because now we see in the
newspapers that Boskin has the ratio at 9 to 1 and somebody else in
the Administration is saying it's 1 to 1.
MR. PRELL.
Part of the problem here--I touched upon this in
my comments a few minutes ago and unfortunately we didn't emphasize
this in the write-up in the Greenbook--is that this is not all of the
deficit reduction that is occurring in essence.
MR. PARRY.

Oh, I know that.

MR. PRELL. This is more or less the mandatory spending and
the tax changes that are in the package.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

MR. PRELL. The ceilings on discretionary spending would have
required significant cuts. That is where, for example, the defense
cuts are coming in.
MR. PARRY.
right data.

I think in assessing the program you have the

MR. PRELL.
people off.

Well, we hope it's relevant and not throwing

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, on the seasonal adjustment
issue, has anyone looked to see what the bias in the CPI does to the
deflator for the fourth and first quarters and, therefore, the GDP
estimates for those quarters?
MR. PRELL. We've looked at that. And our finding, tentative
though it may be, is that it probably doesn't have significant
implications for the deflator. There are different indexes used for
some things and different seasonal adjustments. It's not clear that
this feeds through in an obvious way to the GDP number.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does Commerce seasonally adjust the
price indexes separately?
[Unintelligible] I think they may be doing
something of that nature which would pick this stuff up.
MR. PRELL. Well, we've talked many times, at least to the
staff, about differences in the seasonal pattern for food, for
example, where they have used seasonal factors that were sufficient to
alter the picture of the PCE deflator from what one would think
[looking at] the CPI.
There are also different weights, too, in some
of these things. So, it really is hard to translate.
MR. SLIFMAN. Even within consumption, [for] their PCE, there
are some places where Commerce does not use the CPI. For example, I
think for air fares, which as you know has been a player in this

-17-

7/6-7/93

seasonality problem, they use independent information rather than CPI
information.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mike, a question on capacity utilization, the
lower chart on the lower panel on Chart 14:
In the past it seems to
me that when we got the capacity utilization to a sustained 85 percent
we had price increases.
But with so many industries now becoming
global, the question is whether this is really a meaningful indicator
at this point.
Isn't it entirely possible that we will see domestic
capacity moving up to the higher levels but at the same time we'll
continue to see prices coming down?
MR. PRELL. Discerning flash points is difficult. Certainly,
a level of 85 percent is a very high level, and any time we've been in
that area I think we've been in a period of significant inflation.
People have declared lower levels of capacity utilization to be flash
points. We're not sure that's a particularly robust result.
In our
forecast I don't think we get into the zone where, unless we're
getting some speed effects as well, this is particularly worrisome.
You're right, though:
The more open the economy is, the more
[important] the cost of transportation or the lower relative value of
the products and so on, [and] we're going to have more of a potential
role from foreign supplies in the market. The question is on what
terms. And exchange rate developments, obviously, would affect what
the price pressures--or the depressing price pressures--would be from
foreign capacity. But, indeed, currently in our forecast there is
ample capacity abroad. We think the exchange rate movement will be
favorable in this regard, so it removes still further the concerns
that industrial capacity limits are going to be a major source of
inflationary pressure.
MR. KEEHN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. A couple of things.
First, a comment on your
exchange with Larry Lindsey on the cost of capital. The major
computers buy millions of instructions per second generally. And if
you compare the price of a million instructions per second on a 1980
computer with the 1982 computer when [unintelligible] chips came out
it's a factor of one-one thousandth in the cost. But the problem is
worse than that because we don't include software in capital stock
generally; it's a perishable factor input. And a lot of software
we're using today didn't even exist in 1980, so we can't even make
that comparison. And businesses' real costs of that kind of capital,
at least versus labor costs, has fallen far more dramatically than 40
percent.
MR. LINDSEY. But what surprises me--I understand with
computers--but in the cost of capital equation [1 minus] ITC minus tau
z over 1 minus [tau], the only things that have changed would be
either a rise in the real term or a fall in the true depreciation of
plant and equipment. The tax variables haven't changed since 1988.
I
suppose--I made a quick calculation--that if you took a seven-year
piece of equipment, the [unintelligible] has gone up 19 percent in
real terms, but that's going to work through to maybe a 6 or 7 percent

7/6-7/93

-18-

change in user cost over that time out of 40 percent. So, Jerry, I
think all the computer effect would have to be in the
[unintelligible].
You're saying that computers have caused the real
return of capital to rise.
MR. JORDAN. You can say it that way. I think a part of the
problem is that you're not measuring output the same anymore. You're
focusing just on the input part.
MR. LINDSEY.

Right, right.

MR. JORDAN. But you also have a problem on the output part.
The other comment is really a question to Mike. I want to go back to
the questions that Ed Boehne and Dick Syron asked earlier about
secular and cyclical inflation and your response to them. If I look
at your numbers, the implications of the central tendency of the bond
yield, essentially you're saying to us that compared to '92 or a
couple of years in here we may have a cyclical increase in inflation
but that we are still on a secular downward trend. Whereas it would
appear from household behavior and other things like forward rates
that businesses and households are assuming that we have seen a
secular low in 1992--holding aside whatever cyclical peaks and troughs
from this point forward--and we have not only a cyclical increase
[ahead] but probably a secular increase. Households and businesses
also seem to be assuming that we have seen a secular low in tax rates
beginning with the '90 tax rate, whatever is going to happen after.
So, if you make the assumption that businesses and households alike
are acting in the belief that from this point forward we will have a
generally higher drift of both inflation and tax rates, how do you
factor that into your split between your kind of growth and inflation?
MR. PRELL. It's a complicated question; I'm not sure I can
give a good answer. I'm not sure that the perception is that we've
reached a secular low in inflation, though I find it hard to argue
with that. I certainly think there was a notion that with a growing
economy we probably had reached a cyclical low in inflation. Now, it
may be that many people thought we'd never go below 3 percent; I don't
have a basis for judging that, but maybe that's true.
MR. JORDAN. Wouldn't you say that mortgage refinancings and
corporate debt issuance, quite aside from the surveys, are at least
consistent with the view that the household and business sectors are
assuming we've seen the secular lows?
MR. PRELL. Everybody is operating in an environment of
uncertainty, and people get to a point where they are satisfied if
they can make a gain that's worth the transaction cost. A household
may indeed feel that if they knew or really were convinced that
interest rates were going to go down another point in the next three
months, they'd hold off. But not knowing for sure and having seen
rates come down a good deal, they see they can make a saving. They
also see that some have refinanced a couple or even three times, so
they haven't foreclosed that possibility. Corporations may be in the
same boat; a corporate finance officer knows he can lock in a
reduction in the coupon on his long-term debt and doesn't want to be
criticized for having missed that opportunity if rates back up. He'd
have to be very certain at some point that the rates were going to go
down still further not to go ahead and jump. If you look at bond

7/6-7/93

-19-

issuance over the years, it seems to be motivated as much by the
movement in rates as by the level. And that, I think, would
correspond to this kind of logic, at least to an extent.
MR. JORDAN.

And the same holds for taxes.

MR. PRELL. On taxes, I guess it's plausible to assert that
people feel that the bottom in the marginal tax rates may have been
reached a few years ago.
How that is affecting the various decisions
at this point isn't entirely clear. It presumably affects decisions
about capital structure and so on. There is a wide range of things
As I suggested, it's probably
that could be affecting [decisions].
the notion that taxes are headed up, including possible taxes relating
to medical care. This whole situation is probably making many people
feel poorer than they did a year ago. So, there are a lot of things
going on here which may relate to the kinds of perceptions that you're
talking about.
MR. JORDAN. Even if you cannot do it formally in your model,
wouldn't you say that at least theoretically that should be factored
into a forecast of the growth in output and the composition of that
growth?
MR. PRELL. Sure, in various ways. And as I said, one of the
things that has disinclined us to follow the models to significantly
lower inflation rates over the next year or so, which would seem to be
implied by an unemployment rate near 7 percent, is the notion that it
may be difficult to get those inflation expectations to move down to
the 3 percent rate of inflation that we've observed over the past few
years. We seem to be a long ways from that point. Now, if there was
something that suddenly brought a collapse in expectations, then I
more growth or less
think we could have a much better result:
inflation, or both.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

MR. MULLINS. On your seasonal adjustment--you partially got
into this--how about the other GDP measures, such as the ECI, the
average hourly earnings, and all the other ones that have tended to
accelerate over the past few months?
MR. PRELL. We did some investigation of the ECI.
I don't
remember the numbers but it smoothed things out some but still left
some acceleration on the double seasonal adjustment.
MR. MULLINS.
I assume as soon as we discover this it starts
to work against us!
[Laughter]
How much should we add to the next
core CPI number to adjust for the seasonal bias? Four-tenths?
MR. PRELL.
at this point.
MR. MULLINS.

A tenth or so per month.

It's not a great deal

Okay.

MR. PRELL. This is a quarter in which we are getting the
advantage of this, but I don't think month by month there's a big
effect.

7/6-7/93

-20-

MR. MULLINS.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, June is one of the big months;

MR. MULLINS.

.1 in May, too, wasn't it?

it's .1.
It was

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It was less than .1 in May.

MR. MULLINS.
I won't hold you up but we might just look at
that as we start to smooth it out.
I just had one question on
[Jerry's] comment. How do we interpret the rather large increase in
the number of 50-year maturity, noncallable debt offerings? Do we see
that as indicative of the secular bottom of rates or a very long
cycle?
MR. SYRON.

It's longer than a Kondratieff;

MR. PRELL.

I don't have anything to contribute to the

it's the Mullins'

cycle!
debate!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mike, I just want to make sure I'm reading
correctly the upper left panel of Chart 14, which deals with the
seasonal factors.
As I'm reading that now, the increase in the
measured core CPI through May was at an annual rate of about 4
percent. And if you assume there is a seasonal in the seasonally
adjusted data and this accurately measures it, what you do then is to
take about five-tenths out of that so the corrected measure would be
3-1/2 percent.
MR. PRELL.

That's right.

MR. BROADDUS. That is still an uptick from the 3.1 percent
last year; that's the way that has been structured?
MR. PRELL.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions?

MR. MCTEER. Just a comment.
In Texas what they call
seasonally adjusted, seasonally adjusted data is refried beans!
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Committee's discussion?

Would somebody like to start the

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think what we've
just heard in the Chart Show is very similar to what is going on in
the Atlanta District. Growth in the District has been decelerating.
We led the nation in growth for much of 1992 but now the gap is
narrowing. And I think the weaker activity we've been observing is
pretty evident in our survey of manufacturing plants in the District.
Even though the margin of favorable responses remains positive in
several of the categories, it has been eroding. Also, the early data
for June suggest a further weakening in expectations of activity and

7/6-7/93

-21-

spending six months from now, and that includes about 80 of the 120 or
130 respondents. So, the trend in manufacturing continues to be down.
Consumer spending had been quite strong but it appears to be losing
momentum. At the same time, demand in the interest sensitive sectors,
including single-family homes, is boosting purchases of housing and
related items. And the demand for new automobiles and trucks also
looks reasonably good. Business loans apparently have been growing at
the national level and banks appear to be making more effort to book
loans. That's true to some extent in the District but I'm still
hearing a lot of complaints about the famous credit crunch and the
difficulty people have getting credit, particularly small business
I was in Orlando about two weeks ago and I got an earful from
people.
about eight or ten small business owners who have had long
relationships with banks and are now finding it very difficult to get
credit. Housing developers also are reporting that credit is hard to
get even in cases where market conditions are favorable. Inventories
of unsold homes are small. Nonresidential construction appears to be
bottoming out.
There are some new projects under way in some parts of
the District, particularly build-to-suit kinds of projects. Again, as
I have reported many times over the past several months, price
pressures are virtually nonexistent. Business people are reporting
very highly competitive market conditions.
The main problem is the same one that I and many others
reported last time, and that is the uncertainty about fiscal policy
and the health insurance situation. Everyone seems to be expecting
negative impacts, and I think that's having an effect on business
So, that's
planning and on business fixed investment at the moment.
the situation in the District. Our regional economy is still
relatively strong compared to the nation but it is weakening, and the
momentum seems to be fading to some extent.
Now, with respect to the national outlook, our forecast is
somewhat stronger than the Greenbook throughout the [projection]
period. To a large extent our forecast assumes that the economy will
return to a stronger path of economic recovery when this uncertainty
lifts, whenever that might be. Even with the revisions to capacity
utilization, there is still enough slack to support growth that is
somewhat above potential, for a while at least. The only area where
we have a more pronounced weakness than the Greenbook is in net
exports. And consistent with our higher GDP, we have a lower
unemployment level and a less optimistic price forecast than the
Greenbook. In the case of prices, we are less certain that pressures
from the interim tax can be confined in the economy. In addition,
we're looking at the seasonal adjustment problems and we believe that
1993 doesn't show any improvement in inflation over last year.
Even with that stronger forecast, Mr. Chairman, I myself feel
that the risks to the economy are asymmetric in the sense that I think
the risks are on the down side. It's very difficult, of course, to
estimate the risks and the cost of uncertainty and what that is doing
to the economy. But I do think the uncertainties we have in the
economy at the moment may very well threaten this expansion,
especially if resolution of our fiscal policy and the new health care
program is delayed any further. And while the employment numbers have
been fairly good up until recently, the continued public announcements
of layoffs, particularly by large corporations, are clearly in my
judgment eating away at confidence. Finally, I continue to be

7/6-7/93

-22-

concerned about the continued deterioration of the economies of our
trading partners and the severity of their recessions and what that
means for our economy. So, I think we're in a very difficult period,
Mr. Chairman. Again, I would repeat my judgment that the risk is on
the down side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
question?
in June.

President Jordan.

MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, may I just interrupt to answer a
Our guess is that the core CPI is depressed by half a tenth

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan.

Yes, but that is

[unintelligible].

MR. JORDAN. Thank you. I've continued to tour the District,
visiting not only with bankers but with a lot of their customers,
mainly small businesses, and staying away from the big guys because
they all continue to shrink anyway. What has stood out in all of this
is the extraordinary increase in the utilization of technology [in
areas] that I would never have imagined. It's one thing to see a very
high level of software development and computer usage in something
like titanium hip replacement parts and to see how strong their market
is on a global basis, how much their volume is increasing, how much
their prices are falling, how proud they are of having reduced their
work force, and how determined they are to do more of the same. But
we've also visited turkey processing plants, agricultural feed
products, and an egg-laying operation producing 350 million eggs a
year with 70 workers and a bunch of 486 PCs. Again, the emphasis of
all these people is on the reduction in their work force--how many
fewer people they're able to get by with than they were five years
ago. When people talk about a perceived shortage of something, they
talk about people with the right software to [fix it]; they say they
know they could automate if somebody could just get the time and learn
how to do it with the software. What stands out in this somewhat
casual impression that everybody's emphasis is on substituting
[technology] for labor is that if this period is in time generally
viewed as something comparable to, say, a third industrial revolution,
as some writers have already started to argue, then trying to measure
the economy in terms of jobs and the number of people employed is
going to lead us far astray of what's really going on out there.
At the beginning of this century the largest employer in
North America was the U.S. ice trust. Had we had the emphasis on
preserving jobs at that time we would have made a terrific mistake for
the national economy. It might have precluded air conditioned houses
and offices, which might have helped out on the side of the government
but otherwise probably would have held the economy back very
considerably. So, I think we have to be very, very careful in
interpreting all of the output numbers because we're having more
difficulty in just conceptualizing using the 19th century framework,
which is based on tons and numbers of things when we look at output.
We have to be careful about productivity. The whole retail trade
sector is shown to have had negative factor productivity for more than
a decade mainly because its output goes to the benefit of the
consumers, these optical scanners and so on. And I think it defies
all reason to think that the retail trade sector has negative

7/6-7/93

-23-

productivity gains given what they're doing;
banking industry and so on.

[the same goes for]

the

Turning to just a few sectoral comments about the District,
our agricultural sector is very strong. Our farmers are delighted
with the floods and problems in the Mississippi valley area. They're
looking forward to higher prices; they have their crops in and they
look for good volumes. The disturbing aspect is that some bankers-and this is not farmers themselves talking so I don't know how much
reliability to attach to it--are talking in terms of the price of an
Some of the
acre being up as much as 25 percent from a year ago.
prices they quote--what they say they're getting on loan requests-look unrealistic to me related to the values of the crops associated
with [the land].
Our contacts point out that these prices remain well
below the peak of the agricultural bubble back a decade or so ago, but
they are still very, very sharp increases in land prices.
Confidence of the smaller businesses I would say is still
very, very negative; [it stems] from their perceptions of Washington.
In our discussion in May there was a question as to whether this was
just political bias--usually these small businessmen are Republicans-but my sense of that now is quite the contrary. John LaWare was with
us at our joint board meeting in June and he heard one of the comments
made by one of the directors who comes from a district where the
Democratic registration is 8 to 1, and they are the most upset.
[The
mood is beginning] to take on a jilted lover effect; those who had
high hopes and aspirations and expected the most from this
Administration are the ones who are most angry. So, I don't think
it's politics when they tell us how upset they are about things.
Other conditions in the District generally have not changed.
It's still probably the strongest region in the country. The retail
sector is very good; exporting is very good; auto sales in our area
are very good. There's really nothing there of a negative tone.
I do
want to comment and ask a question, too, about the Greenbook and these
Maybe I misunderstood
FOMC central tendency projections on Chart 16.
what they are. When I look at the Wall Street Journal's summary of
everybody's forecast or any of these other [forecasts], it's one thing
that [unintelligible] is going to happen. I don't think in terms of
[a forecast] by the central bank when it comes to putting down numbers
for inflation; rather I think of these as our objectives because it's
our policies that are going to produce these [outcomes].
And [it
bothers me] to see the Committee raise the central tendency for this
year and also to have the central tendency for next year the same as
it is this year and above where inflation came in in 1992. Am I to
understand that the consensus of the Committee is that inflation is
not going to go down anymore because we're not going to try and
produce lower inflation? Is this an objective or is this a
prediction?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is a prediction and I've made a
very special point to avoid any implication that any of these [data]
are goals.
[We do this] because we are required by statute to present
If we ever put down actual goals, then we
this sort of [stuff].
really will have problems. So we fudge it for the Committee as best
we can.

7/6-7/93

-24-

MR. JORDAN. How do you handle that then when it says that
the Committee's policies are related to inflation? Our objective is
to go to price stability, but we're predicting that the rate of
inflation is going to be sticking in the 3 to 3 plus percent area.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the implication of this is that
it's not clear whether it's pre-policy or post-policy.
MR. JORDAN. Don't you announce them at the same time you
announce our policies?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I purposely never ask anybody around
this table what policy assumptions they are making when they make
these forecasts. So, I feel free to make the statement I just made!
MR. SYRON. The problem you'd clearly have when you get into
it on other side is that someone would note that some people have
raised their estimates on unemployment and would ask if that is our
It seems to me pretty
objective on real growth of employment.
perilous if you are going to have to talk before the Congress and say
our objective is this on prices with this employment figure. You are
in just an intolerable position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, it's an intolerable position. The
whole process is. We would be far better off just dispensing with
this, but we can't.
It puts us in an impossible situation.
MR. JORDAN. Well, there are a couple of things [I'd say]
about that. One, the numbers that we provided are not a prediction of
what is going to happen. When we put down a number [for inflation],
such as the number [we gave] in February, the way I interpret it is
that it's the intent of policy to try and achieve a downward trend.
And I think it's different than unemployment or real GDP or anything
else like that because those are not part of the ultimate objectives
of our policy. Our ultimate objective is to stabilize the purchasing
power of the currency.
I thought our policies ultimately
MR. SYRON. Wait a minute.
were to maximize real growth and that what we did on prices was a way
of doing that.
MR. JORDAN.
like this--

I agree, but in a one-year ahead [framework]

MR. STERN. Well, you could say the same thing about prices
if you really want to get into that and talk about lags. After all,
there's uncertainty as to how quickly things react to whatever policy
moves we might make.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you all get too detailed into this
issue, I will not be able to plead ignorance for the Committee!
MR. JORDAN. Well, one final question: Are the ranges
[showing the central tendency of our forecasts] for 1993 and 1994 to
be taken as acceptable to the Committee?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The answer is no.

President Parry.

7/6-7/93

-25-

MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. New data paint a weaker
picture in the 12th District than I reported at the May meeting.
Employment revisions and subsequent monthly releases show a continued
deterioration in employment in California. Rather than flattening in
early 1993, the new payroll data show a continuous rate of decline.
Preliminary numbers for June show employment down 1.6 percent from a
year ago and falling at a 2 percent annualized rate between May and
June.
Only services have actually shown gains in employment in the
last year. The household survey, which had shown a stronger
employment picture, reported a decline of 187,000 jobs in California
between May and June, bringing the level of employment in that survey
slightly below that of a year earlier and raising the unemployment
rate to 9.1 percent. Now, economic conditions elsewhere in the
District are somewhat better. But even there conditions appear a
little less positive than they did at the time of our last meeting.
Outside of California employment is up 1.7 percent from a year ago,
with employment growth exceeding 3 percent in three of our states:
Idaho, Nevada, and Utah. However, all states except Hawaii and Utah
reported month-to-month declines in employment between April and May.
Also, our Beigebook respondents have become increasingly cautious and
pessimistic about the national outlook. Moreover, our contacts in the
District report that investments in business expansion are being
slowed by uncertainty attributed to tax, health care, and trade
policies.
The state and local governments are facing rather substantial
fiscal problems in the coastal states.
California just put in place a
few days ago a budget that closed a $9.3 billion shortfall. The
agreement, however, created significant problems for local governments
by shifting $2.6 billion of property taxes away from them. They
obviously are going to have to make adjustments in their budgets,
which will have a significant negative impact at least for the current
Oregon is facing the
year in many counties and local areas.
possibility of a 20 percent cut in state expenditures because of lost
property taxes or tax revenues due to Measure 5. And Washington,
which closed a $1.8 billion shortfall earlier this year through a
broadening of the sales tax base and cutting expenditures, is facing a
ballot measure in November that would reverse the tax increase. In
summary, for the District the news is not particularly pleasant.
If I can turn to the national scene, our forecast is very
similar to that of the Greenbook. We do have a second-quarter growth
rate of around 2 percent. Clearly, the more recent statistics with
regard to inflation are more optimistic, but I would say that the
inflation outlook is still very uncertain. We really only have had
one month's data that suggest improvement. And I must admit that the
measures of the degree of slack in the economy are clearly uncertain;
some of that was referred to in the discussion by Mike Prell. All of
this would suggest to me that we have to continue to focus on the
inflation numbers over the next several months because it's really too
early to see what the trend is likely to be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District economy
continued to grow in May and June although at a very moderate rate.
We do a couple of surveys prior to the Beigebook, and the latest one
shows that retail sales edged a bit higher in this two-month period.

7/6-7/93

-26-

Manufacturing activity in our District seems to be steady. I think
the manufacturing situation in our region is probably a little
stronger than nationally because of the composition of our
manufacturing base. Textiles is a big industry in our District and
that industry has been doing reasonably well recently. I think most
business people in our area expect both the regional and the national
economies to continue to grow slowly in the months ahead, but at least
some of the anecdotal commentary I'm hearing has been less positive
over the last several weeks. Concerns about tax increases and
uncertainty regarding the prospective additional tax increases
accompanying health care are part of the problem, but I think the
prospective military base closings in our District are the central
current worry. If the Federal Commission's recommendations are
accepted, and I guess most people think they will be, that's going to
hurt the Fifth District particularly hard, especially the states of
South Carolina and Virginia. The Charleston, South Carolina area has
estimated they would lose about 14,000 jobs. One local newspaper
referred to that as another Hurricane Hugo coming through
prospectively. In Virginia, combined potential losses in Norfolk and
northern Virginia would amount to about 18,000 to 20,000 jobs and
those estimates don't include the multiplier effects of these direct
losses on local job markets. So, that's a cloud hanging over at least
two states in our region.
Regarding the national picture, our basic forecast is not
terribly different from the Greenbook. Our real GDP projections are a
little higher for both '93 and '94 but close to most of the private
forecasts I've seen. On the other hand, our inflation projections are
similar to the Greenbook's, which generally are more optimistic than
most private forecasts out there. Still, on balance, we're a little
more optimistic than most people which gives me a bit of a pause. But
this optimism is relative optimism. It's justified because we base
it--and I don't want to get too detailed here--fundamentally on the
assumption that this Committee will do whatever it has to do to help
increase the credibility of our longer-term strategy. And if we do
that, I think that will allow for both continued moderate growth and
continued disinflation.

Obviously, some of the latest data are pretty

discouraging, especially the June employment report; but it strikes me
that the overall picture is not all that bleak. As the Greenbook
indicates, aggregate hours worked in the second quarter were up quite
substantially, so I think the bounceback in real GDP growth in the
second quarter, as the Greenbook is forecasting, is certainly
plausible; and it could even come in a little stronger than that.
Beyond this, we in Richmond think it's reasonable to expect at least a
moderate further acceleration in the quarters ahead. In particular,
it strikes us that economic conditions are improving in a number of
our major export markets; some of the data that Ted recited reinforced
that view. It's possible, therefore, that exports can be a somewhat
greater source of strength for us going forward than is generally
anticipated. That's not to say there are no downside risks.
Obviously, the potential substantial tax increases are especially big
negatives. But my own feeling is that the moderate projections in the
Greenbook and the slightly higher projections that we have are both
plausible outcomes despite the fiscal drag.
With respect to inflation, the rate of increase in the core
CPI in the first five months of the year, even if it's a little less
than the published data, is troubling. My own view is that the

7/6-7/93

-27-

increasingly widespread perception in the financial markets and to a
certain extent in the broader economy is that we at the Fed are
prepared to act to hold any potential increase in inflation in check.
I think that's already beginning to have a measurable effect in
holding inflationary expectations down. I think we see that in the
bond markets recently. If we can maintain this posture and
communicate it, I think it's reasonable to expect at least the modest
further improvement in inflation [projected] in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, with regard to the national
economy, our forecast really is quite close to the staff's forecast.
But it is interesting that when we first made a forecast for 1993 this
time last year, we started off lower than the staff forecast. We were
at the time somewhat pessimistic but as we've gone through the year
[unintelligible] and at this point the differences aren't that large.
Our outlook for inventory levels and residential construction is
somewhat stronger than the staff numbers.
This is perhaps reflective
of conditions in the District.
In the District, the level of economic activity continues to
expand but the pace of the increase is beginning to show signs of
moderating. The auto industry continues to be our bright light.
Retail sales are continuing at good levels and inventories are in good
balance. The third-quarter production schedules, which have been set
about 18 percent over last year, seem reasonably firm at this point.
The heavy truck business continues to be solid; retail sales of heavy
trucks are forecast at about 129,000 units this year; that's a good
year for them. But some of the strength is being driven by pending
changes in regulations rather than normal market forces, and there are
some preliminary indications that the heavy truck order rate is
falling; indeed, there are a few signs of order cancellations.
In the steel business, while the order and production rates
continue at good levels, the significant development has been the
preliminary settlement of the contract the USW has been negotiating
It seems to be coming out on a nonwith the first company.
inflationary basis. The contract preliminarily agreed to calls for a
$500 signing bonus, a $500 lump sum payment in the second year and a
$.50 per hour wage increase in the third year; there are no wage
increases in the first and second years.
There's also a $1,000 lump
sum payment in 1996 if the company earns over a specified level in
1995.
Given the substantial changes in work rules and the substantial
give-back on health care, the company feels that it can easily cover
That deal is far
the higher cost through productivity increases.
better than what they had hoped for at the outset of the negotiations.
Retail sales in the District have been reasonable thus far,
running about 3 to 4 percent over last year. There is some strength
in appliances and home improvement items.
In the agricultural
sector, we have something [akin to the reverse] of what Jerry Jordan
referred to. His good news, of course, is our bad news. I will say,
though, that the ag equipment business has been very good up until
now. Therefore, based on these higher sales levels, at least one
manufacturer has increased its production schedules for the second
half of the year by some 13 percent. But the miserable weather that
we've been having and continue to have is a real downer. The corn

-28-

7/6-7/93

crop planting is in one sense complete, but as of late last week it
looked as if in Iowa alone some 6 percent of the corn crop would have
to be replanted. The soybean crop has been badly delayed and I think
it's not going to get completed. It's clear that we're going to have
an acreage shortage in soybeans once things get straightened out.
It's going to take quite a while to assess just how much damage is
going to result from all of this rain but, clearly, that has not been
a plus for the District.
On the inflation front, despite the discouraging numbers that
we've talked about for the early part of the year, I really don't
sense any significant upward pressures on prices on a broad basis.
Competitive conditions remain very, very intense in the market.
Certainly, this is true in the retail sector where it takes
significant sales and discounts to move products. One manufacturing
company that I talked with follows the cost of their purchase
materials very closely; it's a large manufacturer. They had been
forecasting a decrease of 1/2 percent in the cost of their purchase
materials this year. They re-forecasted just last week and they now
expect the cost of their purchase materials to decline by 0.9 percent;
they really have a very constructive look on the price of their
purchases. As for wage costs, with the steel contract seemingly
settled on a non-inflationary basis, the bargaining focus will shift
to the auto negotiations which just started. It's far too early to
tell just how that's going to work out, but that certainly will be a
key item on the wage front. Net, while the economy continues to
expand, it just doesn't seem to have that much strength, and I think
we could be facing a pretty mediocre outlook. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did you say something on whether you
sensed that the capital goods markets are being affected by the tax
uncertainties?
People are very
MR. KEEHN. There's no question about it.
uncertain; the level of uncertainty caused by the discussions [in
Washington] has led people to hold back.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
consequence?

You know of projects on hold as a

MR. KEEHN. I don't think I could be specific about major
projects on hold, but I know that capital purchases are clearly being
affected by this.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Bob Forrestal's discussion of the Southeast
economy pretty much describes the Southwest economy. During the
recovery and expansion we have pretty much led the nation, but as we
moved into 1993 that gap was narrowing. And possibly in April and
May, based on employment numbers, we may have fallen behind the
nation's pace of growth. So, things are weakening relative to the
rest of the country even though they're still moving forward. One of
the changes has been that Mexico, which had been a major source of
strength both to our manufacturing industries and to retail sales
along the border, may be turning into a weakening factor as they've
had slower economic growth and as they've continued the collection of
duties at the border that they imposed at Christmas.
Bob mentioned

7/6-7/93

-29-

that the credit crunch was still alive and well.
I think that's true
in the Eleventh District as well. Although we get more and more
indications of banks going out and aggressively marketing loans now,
I don't have a lot of indications that many more loans are being made;
but at least on the surface that seems to be improving. In addition
to the uncertainty surrounding the tax and spending plans of the
Federal government, we have some added uncertainty in our part of the
country over the prospects for NAFTA. There is some anxiety about
that, which is probably slowing things down just a little. Also, the
energy tax probably did more to slow things down in our area of the
country than it did in the rest of the country, but that has faded
somewhat given the way they're changing that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. The District economy continues to be mixed. I'm
not sure that overall it is deteriorating sharply, but its growth has
been slower than the nation's all along. And while the gap may be
narrowing some, that's not so much because we're picking up but
because the rest of the nation's economy seems to be coming to meet
us. We have seen the same quite noticeable deterioration in the
manufacturing sector that Bob Forrestal pointed to and it is
continuing into this month. That's affecting employment plans and has
cut significantly into the capital spending plans of the manufacturers
in our region. While manufacturing has been showing this noticeable
weakening, the retailers seem to have been doing better--certainly the
second quarter was better than the first quarter--although in recent
weeks that seems to have flattened out some. Nonetheless, I think the
tone in retailing is better. The residential construction people are
feeling better. Not only are sales of new homes moving but there also
is new residential construction. The nonresidential area continues to
be a big drag and will be, I think, for a number of years.
One of the areas that has been a mainstay of strength in the
Third District, particularly the greater Philadelphia area, has been
the health care industry. And that is changing. Where that has been
a plus in employment gains, I think we are going to see that turn
negative. The hospitals, which had been adding people, have made a
number of cutbacks; and some of our hospitals are laying off people.
In terms of defense, I think the best way to describe it is that the
District economy expected to be hit by a cannon ball and it's just a
shotgun blast and not a cannon ball, so it feels better because at
least it's not as bad as expected. Overall, employment has increased
but not a great deal.
The financial institutions are out there trying
to drum up business. They report some uptick in lending activity, but
it's still rather flat on the whole. As for inflation, there just do
not seem to be upward price pressures. Wage rate increases, however,
do continue higher than one might expect in this kind of market, at
around 4 percent or so, I'd say, rather than decelerating.
As far as the nation goes, our forecast is somewhat higher
than the Greenbook's in this slow-to-moderate growth range that I
think we all see. Nonetheless, I think the uncertainties that are out
there do put the risks on the down side. There are these macro risks
that we all talk about, the budget package. In some ways I think the
business community is more concerned about health care reform than the
immediate tax increases. But for the individual, at the more micro
level, the uncertainty instead of abating, if anything, is increasing.

-30-

7/6-7/93

I think people are as much if not more concerned about their own jobs,
their own companies, their own futures; and they sense that the margin
for error is not very great. We are in one of those situations where
the unexpected shock--all shocks by definition are unexpected because
we don't know what they will be--[would be troublesome].
I don't
think we can take a very big one at this point.
On the inflation side, I think we can continue to make some
progress but we are at the point in the cycle where the gains on
inflation are just not going to come as easily as they did earlier.
My own sense is that we have a way to go in terms of secular gains,
and I think we could continue to get inflation down on a secular
basis. But we ought not to deceive ourselves:
The gains are going to
be very tough as this cycle wears on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Activity in our
District continues not unlike what it was the last time I reported.
Farm income remains good within our District, helped by continued
strong cattle and livestock prices; and our wheat harvest should be
reasonably good. Construction activity is being led importantly by
residential construction in the Denver and Omaha areas; nonresidential
building remains brisk through the second quarter. Oil and gas
drilling has picked up ever so slightly; thus that industry is
remaining stable after some period of pretty significant decline.
Manufacturing for us, as you've heard from others, remains sluggish.
Some companies are hesitating; in a couple of conversations I've had,
particularly with those in food processing and the nondurable goods
areas, my contacts said they had just put off some additional
expansion. And one company's chairman said that they do not hire
without his permission. These are companies with several hundred
employees. So, the uncertainty is having an effect, I think, on some
of these activities in the manufacturing sector.
Looking ahead for the District, I think farm income should
continue strong, with good harvests and continued good prices in the
cattle area. In construction the flow of new contracts is good, so we
think activity there will remain good for our District. With some
weakening in the prices in the oil and gas area, it appears that this
slight improvement that we've seen may not be long-lasting; we just
don't know at this time. Manufacturing, until we get some of the
uncertainty out, I think is going to remain a little more sluggish
than it might otherwise be.
I have talked with individuals about credit and credit access
in our region. That has improved although we do still get some
feedback that it's hard to get loans; that is much less the case than
it was a few months ago. And the evidence, in terms of increases in
credit outstanding, would suggest that that area is improving.
At the national level we, like others, continue to see modest
growth. Our forecast is also somewhat stronger than the Greenbook,
led not by consumption but by somewhat stronger projections in
residential activity, business fixed investment, and not quite as
negative a change on the government spending side. What that suggests
to us, though, is that in this world of uncertainty--and especially as
it relates to inflation--without some change in policy over the

7/6-7/93

forecast period we could see inflation at a somewhat higher level than
is projected in the Greenbook. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, with regard to
the outlook for the national economy, just like about everybody else
who has already spoken, I think the very modest recovery that we've
had is likely to continue.
So I have no real disagreements with the
central tendency [of the members' forecasts] or the Greenbook
forecast.
That, in my judgment at least, is how things seem likely to
play out.
I don't see a lot of vulnerability to [such a forecast] at
the moment.
As far as inflation is concerned, I also agree with those
who said that it doesn't look as if there's going to be a lot of
further progress in bringing down the rate of inflation at least over
this forecast horizon. And that is my greatest concern. I don't have
a sense that expectations are working for us. My sense is that
expectations are that if inflation hasn't hit its low for this cycle,
it's close to it.
So, that's not a favorable factor. I have a sense
that the general thrust of government policy is, if anything, going to
add to inflation. That just says that our job is not going to be made
any easier by a variety of other things that I can contemplate over
the next 18 months or so. That's my greatest concern about the
outlook at the national level.
I think progress on the inflation side
will be tough.
With regard to the District, again, there's not a lot of news
to report.
The regional economy has been in good shape for an
extended period. That largely continues. There have been more broadbased and frequent reports of banks becoming somewhat more aggressive
in trying to meet their loan targets and finding some frustration in
their inability to do so. Of course we, too, have been affected by
the floods.
And although that's [concentrated] in a rather narrow
band, it has affected or probably will affect corn and soybean output
in the District and will have some spillover effects for tourism as
well. Finally, there is ongoing concern about the fate of Northwest
Airlines and their potential Chapter 11 filing. I was told that they
did reach agreement with the pilots today, but I haven't been able to
confirm that.
The pilots are undoubtedly the key, but they're not the
only union involved. So that situation remains iffy at the moment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Looking at our economic projections, we're at
the high end of the central tendency for 1993 and we are clearly an
outlier on the high end with respect to 1994.
I wouldn't make policy
based on these projections, but basically how we look at it is that
we've had a very stimulative thrust of policy for a couple of years
running here and that's showing through to the real side a little in
1993 and more of that would show through in prices in 1994.
If that
were to happen, though it's quite possible it's just an inflationary
bubble, the question would be this expectations issue that we've been
talking about.
Even if we thought our policies were on a course that
would gradually bring that back down, how do we deal with expectations
in the meantime? So, I see that as a potentially tough issue for us
to deal with. The other issue I see is one that Ed Boehne, Gary
Stern, and others have touched on, which is this longer-term question

-32-

7/6-7/93

as to how we approach some concept of price stability and over what
time frame.
With respect to the District, we're still showing strong
numbers.
I've heard a number of people say that they see less gap
between their Districts and some of the stronger Districts. I guess
we see that too, but I would be more inclined to view it as [an
indication] that the rest of the nation may be catching up as opposed
to our losing steam. We're still, in the latest three-month period
for which we have figures, getting strong growth in both manufacturing
and non-manufacturing employment, basically in the area of 2-1/2
percent at an annual rate.
In the manufacturing area that's across
most sectors except chemicals and transportation. Interestingly
enough, despite this strong pattern on the real side, we're not seeing
much growth in bank credit demand. For large reporting banks we'll
see the numbers up one week and down the next week; and C&I loans on
an annual basis are still down about a percent from the prior year.
Recently, we had a group of homebuilders in and they said they are
looking ahead to a very strong third quarter--that's already built in
--and they expect to see significant follow-through in consumer
durables. On the other hand, some people in the commercial area--and
this is just anecdotal information from a group we talked to--see
capacity basically being disassembled. They see the entrepreneurial
developer really not being able to get financing and that is beginning
to spill back to the contractors and general contractors. Some of
those contractors can hang on for a while, but even the stronger ones
--looking ahead a year or two--are wondering how they're going to keep
going. In that conversation I heard the comment--[mentioned] before
by Gary, I believe--about the impacts of certain government policies
and the concern about that. When I asked about inflation, these
people mentioned the price of cement, which has gone up about 50
percent in St. Louis.
That has to do with the plants that produce it
just being unwilling or unable to spend the money to put on the
environmental controls.
So, it's a short-term supply problem. I
think the people at that luncheon and generally the people I talk to
view things like that as aberrational. They don't seem to be
generally concerned about a build-up of broad inflationary pressures;
I think they are more concerned about real growth. That about wraps
it up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Oltman.

MR. OLTMAN. Our projections are pretty close to the
Greenbook projections, a little higher on GDP for 1993 but well within
the [Committee members' central] tendency. I must say I have to
repeat the theme of uncertainty. Among those we've talked to within
the District, that theme is repeated often. It seems sometimes only
to be a [matter of] what is in fashion to cite as the focus of the
uncertainty:
the health care reform or the fiscal package or the
state of overseas economies affecting exports.
Overall economic
activity in the District seems to be slowing somewhat but still
growing at a modest rate. There's almost a reluctance to concede this
on the part of some of the people we talk to; they seem to want to
make sure that we don't misunderstand that, yes, things are a little
better but they're not as much better as they ought to be [so] don't
get the wrong idea.

7/6-7/93

-33-

As far as inflation is concerned, Gary Stern's observation
holds for much of what we've been hearing as well. There does not
seem to be too much concern about inflation but there is some
suggestion that [this view] results from the feeling that [the current
level of inflation] is probably about as well as we can do and it's so
much better than it has been, so let us not worry too much about that.
Some of our manufacturing contacts, for example, have experienced some
mild increase in activity but without expectations that price
increases are going to occur over the next year, or the next six
months at any rate.
Credit demand, to hear the bankers, is not there;
to hear the small businessmen the demand is at least a lot stronger
than the bankers would have you believe. When you begin to dig a
little into that, you hear the familiar story of demand for higher
collateral and a lot more paperwork, all of which is read by the
potential borrowers as efforts to discourage them. The bankers on the
other hand insist, as some others here have said, that they are going
out and beating the bushes and mounting serious campaigns to bring in
borrowers. How to square that is difficult to say; there probably is
some truth on both sides. To the extent that the borrowers are
prepared to put up more collateral--in the case of small borrowers,
for example--very often it is personal collateral, mortgages on
personal residences and things of that kind. That means an uncertain
atmosphere generally for economic activity and a little more than a
lot of uncertainty for the small business borrowers. So I would say
the overall mood is reluctantly positive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, the theme all afternoon here has
been about expectations and perceptions, and I'd like to make a few
comments in a couple of areas along that same line. First, it seems
to me that fiscal policy may be coming back into our dialogue a bit
more strongly, assuming the dominant role that it may have had in
earlier eras. Recently I think the economy has been working on its
own dynamics, and monetary policy has been key while fiscal policy has
had its effect largely by its absence.
I think it's coming back.
Like monetary policy and the course of inflation, I think fiscal
policy has two facets to it.
One relates to how the numbers actually
flow and the other is this matter of expectations and perceptions.
And right now expectations and perceptions in the form of uncertainty
are very, very dominant. No doubt the numbers are going to begin to
have an effect as time goes on and, as the Greenbook says, [that will
happen] as tax policy gets settled and some of these other issues such
as health care begin to have their own numerical impact, which
undoubtedly is going to be contractive. But I have an idea that over
time sentiment may just start to flow the other way because I think
this uncertainty has a life of its own. So to some extent, maybe a
large extent, when clarity begins to emerge--almost regardless of what
that clarity tells us--it's going to help. We may get more help from
the clarity side than a contractive impact from the actual effect of
the numbers. I have some fear in saying that because the reality
could be so negative!
[Laughter]
Secondly, on the outlook for growth, we all look for an
engine for growth in the various components of GDP and we can't find
one.
It's just not there. But there may be another, if you will,
off-balance sheet engine that's at work and has been at work all
along. And that is just the basic restless, nervous energy of the

7/6-7/93

-34-

I ask
American people and the inherent optimism we undoubtedly have.
myself how, in the face of all the very severe shocks we've had in the
last several years in this economy, we've been able to experience a
mild recession followed by eight straight quarters--this will be the
ninth--of recovery from the recession. And all of this has occurred
in the face of these famous head winds we've been talking about for a
long time. I think the answer may lie in this very positive
underlying attitude toward progress, this restless energy to improve
things that is still in my opinion very much the dominant ethic of the
American people and the American economy. Our nation's basic
orientation in that direction may prove to be the engine that isn't
there in any specific quantitative component of GDP. Right this
minute I think that's being repressed by these uncertainties, just to
kind of close the circle. But as these uncertainties begin to clarify
and take on identifiable characteristics, we quite likely will get a
breakout on the up side from that inherent dynamism.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

MR. MULLINS. With respect to the real economy, I don't know
that I have a lot to add. I still see moderate growth--others might
call it slow growth--at a rate of perhaps 2-1/2 to 3 percent. On
consumer spending, I as yet see no compelling evidence that we're
falling off the path of sustained moderate growth. Auto sales
continue to be quite strong. Nothing else continues to be very
strong, but at least auto sales seem to be holding up. The way I read
consumer confidence is that the Michigan current index is near its
recent high; the most recent month at least is only a bit below March
and April, the recent peaks, and is above every other month before
that. The expected index has fallen off--there is this uncertainty
about the outlook that Mike was talking about--but it's still above
where it was in October. I also remain hopeful that the housing
recovery, despite some fits and starts, will pick up steam. We have
the lowest mortgage rates in 21 years. And I do believe, when I hear
it around the table and wherever I go, that we may be beginning to see
evidence that this could affect business spending. Now business
spending has been quite strong.
The uncertainty affects business
spending and it could decelerate a bit due to concern about the tax
proposals. I find that hard to see convincingly in the data yet; even
in the survey data on capital spending, which have come down
marginally, we haven't seen a big drop-off. Presumably, there is
concern about taxes in the budget proposal.
I agree with Ed Boehne in
that the bigger concern I keep hearing about is the health care
proposal.
That is unfortunate because the tax uncertainty presumably
will be resolved soon, though it may be a close vote; but the health
care uncertainty is not likely to be resolved soon, even if the
proposals are presented in late summer or early fall.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

September.

MR. MULLINS. Yes, September. The Administration has shown
that it is willing to alter firmly held beliefs as things move through
Congress. This could mean next year. Now, capital spending is not a
huge part of the economy [but] it has been the most reliable component
of the recovery; it's that little engine we've had going. And the
Greenbook has it decelerating only a bit.
Loan demand seems to be
picking up nonetheless, so I think even here it's a mixed picture.
The positive thing I see is that employment has shown steady growth

7/6-7/93

-35-

despite the weak June numbers. We've seen more jobs created in the
first half of 1993 than in all of 1992, roughly a million jobs in each
case. Despite the talk about the reduced propensity to hire, monthly
job growth in the second quarter is 161,000 jobs a month on average,
virtually the same as in the first quarter. The hours and overtime
still suggest that continued slow growth is likely to spill over into
more moderate growth in employment. The pattern of job growth in the
last several quarters, the gradual improvement, I think will
contribute to the durability and sustainability of the recovery as a
self-reinforcing process, and in my view that reduces the downside
risks.
So, when I total it up I still see 2-1/2 to 3 percent real
GDP growth where perhaps before I saw 3 to 3-1/2 percent. With a
normal quarterly variation around that mean--and the variation has
been, if anything, smaller than normal in this period--it's inevitable
that we will see quarters below 1 percent and up near 5 percent. I
look forward to seeing the latter soon. Now, it is true this is
thought of, at least in immediate terms, as a weak or fragile economy.
And, of course, I remember a weak economy. My first three quarters on
the Board were all negative quarters. As Mike mentioned, we've had
nine consecutive quarters of growth and, I suspect, six quarters or
1-1/2 years with growth averaging between 2-1/2 and 3 percent. We can
continue to hold our breath with each quarterly draw from the
distribution. Instead, I think it's useful to try to detect
significant changes, deterioration in the underlying forces which have
been gradually and steadily pushing the economy forward for a year and
a half now; and I don't see the hard evidence of that deterioration
yet, though I must admit the anecdotal pessimism is a bit high. But,
again, I think some of the uncertainty will be resolved.
On the inflation front, it's nice to get some good news for a
change even if it's only one month's number, as Bob Parry mentioned.
I think the positive way of viewing it is that in two out of the past
three months we've had favorable inflation data. Unfortunately, in my
view, it will take a while to extinguish the trend. The negative way
to view it is that for eight months now, since the end of the third
quarter, core CPI has averaged roughly 4 percent versus about 2-1/2
percent for the previous six months. That's the most negative way one
can carve it. The seasonal adjustment problems may have exaggerated
the trend, but it bothers me that the CPI hasn't been the only
troublesome index. Both the implicit price deflator and the fixed
weight index have accelerated over the last couple of quarters--the
former from 1.8 percent to 3.5 percent. The fixed weight index, which
is perhaps the more traditional measure of inflation, bottomed in the
third quarter of last year at 2.2 percent and the recently revised
first-quarter number is 4.3 percent. The employment cost index for
total compensation bottomed in the second quarter of last year at 2.9
percent and accelerated to 4.2 percent in the first quarter. The
Purchasing Managers' diffusion index has registered five consecutive
quarters of increases after a few months of negatives before that.
The trend, if one projects these numbers, is not encouraging, of
course. So in my view it has been a long blip and one reflected in a
number of broadly based inflation measures. And it's one that has
persisted for six to eight months in an environment of slack and slow
growth. However, the immediacy of the inflation concern, the forcing
nature of the argument, has to do with the developing path of future

7/6-7/93

-36-

inflation and not really the past six or eight months and importantly
the extent to which inflation concerns infect the market.
In my view so far this year we've had two episodes where
inflation fears have affected the bond market. The long bond rate has
backed up by 25 basis points, not all due to the inflation concerns
but at least its coincidence with the release of inflation numbers
would suggest to me that it was a major contributor. The first was in
March and early April when the long rate advanced to 7 percent
following the poor January and February and fourth-quarter inflation
numbers. That was doused by the favorable March numbers. And then
following the poor April numbers the long bond again flirted with 7
percent; the good inflation numbers for May revived the prospect that
the upturn in inflation might give way under the weight of economic
fundamentals and the market returned to a wait-and-see attitude; the
long rates retrenched to new record lows aided by the success of the
President's program in Congress. While the inflation fears in the
bond market have receded, obviously some commodity prices continue to
be a bit troublesome. On balance, when I look at the data I think the
recent evidence weakens the case for an immediate action on the
federal funds rate. Nonetheless, the concern about inflation, at
least my concern, was not created by poor performance in a single
month's data nor is it likely to be extinguished by a single month's
better performance. Importantly, in the upcoming intermeeting period
we shall be receiving a significant quantity of new information on
inflation, not only the CPI and the PPI but also the two GDP quarterly
measures and the ECI measure as well.
And I think that should provide
some important input into the developing trend going forward. I might
add that the average hourly earnings for the second quarter, which we
got the other day, had decelerated to essentially the bottom reached
last year, and that's a hopeful sign. Still, we are particularly
vulnerable to negative surprises in the bulk of the data coming out.
One thing that is already apparent from the numbers in Chart
16 is that the FOMC has changed its view of '93 inflation and so has
the staff. The central tendency is up by about a half percentage
point; the staff's estimate is up by 0.7 percent.
It's also true that
we've marked down our real growth perceptions as well. But even
though our view of '93 inflation has changed significantly, the
federal funds rate has not changed. As to why all this is happening,
I found the staff's presentation very interesting. The speed effect-and I have no really fresh insights--does suggest that we can affect
inflation over this period. It's not a very pleasant prospect to
suggest that growth of 2-1/2 percent is a lot more favorable than
3-1/2 percent; one hates to punish growth as a way to achieve it.
When I review the past six months or so and look across the different
measures, I tend to attach more weight to the simple expectations
hypothesis, although it is also related to Mike's speed argument. I
think we recognized last year that even though actual inflation fell,
long-term expectations didn't seem to change very much. And some of
us even talked about a period of testing to resolve the dissonance
between expectations and inflation fundamentals.
I suggest that
that's exactly what we've been experiencing over the past few
quarters. Businesses restrained price increases during the couple of
very weak years we had. In the second half of 1992 the economy grew a
little over 4 percent and I think they returned to the norm of trying
to pass through 4 percent inflation.
In an environment of slack and
slow growth of money and credit, this should not be sustainable. But

-37-

7/6-7/93

it has persisted for a couple of quarters and I would not
underestimate the staying power of firmly held expectations because
many economists and business people simply do not see inflation as a
problem at 3-1/2 or 4 percent; they see it as the norm. I might also
add that we had an interesting experience last week in the Board room
when we had in the American Bankers Association panel of bank
economists. Their view is very similar to the Blue Chip forecast,
which we've talked about before, and also I think to the [view cited
in the] Wall Street Journal this morning. None of them sees a problem
with inflation. It's going to continue to rise gradually up through
the 3 percent range even though they're projecting large, ample slack
continuing. There just seems to be enormous gravitational pull to
expectations, and I suspect we're in the midst of an extended battle
between expectations and fundamentals.
This battle is at the core of
any attempt to achieve lasting reductions in inflation, which is going
to require reduced inflationary expectations. And I feel our stance
and our actions, including how we respond to higher-than-expected
inflation, are also quite important to the ultimate outcome of that
battle.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just a couple of points
because it's late and we've gone over a lot of things. As far as the
region goes, there is not much change. What there is has involved
some deterioration and a slightly softening mood. There has been a
deterioration in the business mood from uncertainty to somewhere
between resignation and fear.
I would tell the same story that
everyone tells; it's virtually universal among almost everyone I talk
to. We're not two sentences into the conversation when they raise
health care, taxes, and all of these other subjects. I think Mike
Kelley is right that some clarity would help, but I'm not sure we are
going to get it in a hurry.
Very quickly, retailers have seen some softening most
recently. Manufacturing is more mixed but the really strong spot
we've seen in manufacturing in our District has been related to autos.
Everything else seems to have softened a bit, including aerospace, as
one might expect. Loan demand shows some slight improvement but is
still soft. Ed Boehne talked about an unexpected shock
[unintelligible] would get here. Actually, we try to keep in touch
with financial people and it's interesting that they have expressed
some concern about all this money flowing into mutual funds and about
what will happen when we get a little market correction and people
find these funds are not really CD-like in a nominal term sense. I
would say the mood of these people and the fund managers is perhaps
understandable; it's fairly sensitive. They're really quite concerned
about this and think we might be in a fragile situation.
Talking to the same general group of people about prices
demonstrates the rather tough position we're in [because] it's a
little like what David Mullins said. They say inflation is not really
a problem. We ask what they have factored into their forecast or
their budget when they buy things and they answer 3 to 3-1/2 percent
inflation or something like that. They say they don't really see
inflation going anywhere. One of our directors did a survey and found
very low expectations about solving the inflation problem. But when
we talk to people about what they think about monetary policy, what

7/6-7/93

-38-

comes out is that they see this as not a monetary policy driven
inflation, though they're not saying it can't be influenced [by
monetary policy].
But in terms of their expectations, they have a
deeply held conviction that the American economy has some inflationary
bias built in of around 3 percent whether it comes from steel
protection, workers comp, or other kinds of things. Essentially, a
lot of people I've talked to think that it's so expensive to get
inflation below what they see as an asymptote of 2-1/2 to 3 percent
that it's not likely to happen.
As far as the real economy goes, I have little disagreement
with what the Greenbook says.
Our own forecast is slightly stronger.
I think the Greenbook is probably more correct, to tell the truth.
[Laughter]
One place that I do have some concern is Europe; the news
I hear from talking to people just seems to keep getting worse,
whether it's American manufacturers with facilities there or people
selling into that market or European bankers coming here. Now, maybe
we're coming to a trough on all that as well.
The long and the short
is that I think the risks to the economy are probably centered, but
they could easily go on the down side as well as the up side; I [can]
see this going [either] way. And I think the probability of another
decline is certainly greater than zero.
In terms of what we do about all this with policy, it's hard
to think about much change but I would be heavily influenced by how
the Chairman wants to convey things in his Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.
When we get to the very fine minutia of how we word things, that would
be a significant factor in deciding.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'd like to identify
myself very closely with Bob Forrestal's analysis expressed earlier.
I, too, feel that the primary risks are on the down side at the
moment. People are anxious about jobs, and they don't see any
developments either in terms of government action or in private sector
actions that will generate new job opportunities. And that makes for
a very cautious attitude on the part of consumers, which then gets
reflected in the willingness of manufacturers to make long-term
commitments.
I think auto sales are an aberration caused by the
advanced age of the auto inventory in the hands of consumers.
[The
age of the auto stock] is at about the highest point it has been in
some time and there's a lot of replacement buying that is seen by
consumers as necessary. It's not that they get overwhelmed with the
desire for a new car; it's a necessity kind of move.
Underlying all of that, I'm worried that we're beginning to
see a disillusion on the part of the public with the political process
in this country. With that disillusion is a lack of any confidence
that either the Administration or the Congress is going to find an
acceptable way out of this problem. I don't know what the technical
definition of stagflation is, but if we continue to make revisions in
our forecast that go along the lines that we have recently done here
for 1993 looking into 1994, it tends to look more and more like
stagflation. And stagflation is a nightmare for monetary policy
because the very solutions that solve the inflation problems are
likely to tank the economy in terms of growth. That's a condition

7/6-7/93

-39-

that we don't want to get into, but I don't see what we can do about
it at the moment. So, I'm somewhat dejected at the moment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I sort of picked that up.

Governor

Angell.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I don't think I've heard such pessimism in
a long, long time.
I'm not sure what has changed. I don't know what
it is that's getting worse.
I don't know what business profits are
declining. I do not know that nominal GDP is really going to come in
for the entire year as the staff suggests at 4.8 percent when in that
lousy first quarter nominal GDP was 4.4 percent. But maybe I'm seeing
things somewhat differently.
I would like to focus just a minute on the lag in monetary
policy. Even though we don't have an M2 that works the way we want
and we don't think M2+ would suffice either, there is a concept of a
kind of pure M out there.
That is, there are transaction balances
that we've created over the last 10 to 12 years.
Investment money has
been mixed up with our [measure of] deposit money, so we don't know
what that pure M has been doing. If we did know what it was doing, we
would have some sense of being forward-looking. Since we don't know
what it's doing, it's almost as if we're faced with looking at last
month's CPI or last quarter's CPI. And, frankly, it's very, very
scary to me to think about our trying to run monetary policy based
upon last quarter's GDP or last quarter's rate of change in the CPI.
Certainly no one, I presume, expects that there's much we can do about
Can monetary policy now alter what
the CPI rate of change in 1993.
happens in 1993? It seems to me we're working on monetary policy with
regard to the rate of inflation for 1994 and, indeed, even into 1995.
I don't have the ability to see 1995 clearly enough to do monetary
policy based upon that fact. And since there's no M2 or other
monetary aggregate out there to guide us, I think we have to look at
some other matters.
Now, a bit contrary to Ed Boehne's view that we're at the
place in the cycle where we're not going to get much more inflation
improvement, it seems to me that we have several factors working in
our favor in terms of [moving to] a lower inflation rate. We have not
had any minimum wage increase in 1993; that's not in the numbers.
We
haven't had any major supply shocks throughout the world, no oil
shocks, no [unintelligible].
We haven't had in the United States any
significant impact of employment cost conditions that would in a sense
be a driving force for inflation. We've existed in a world in 1993 in
which use of resources is way down. This ought to be a very desirable
time to be getting inflation rates down. We're in a period where we
have some real productivity gains, as has been noted; and those
productivity gains ought to be helping us to get more than cyclical
improvement in inflation numbers. Now, inflation in my view is not a
micro-economic deal; it is a monetary policy deal. The rest of the
world, the other six countries in the G-7, are running a rate of
inflation a full percentage point below what they were running even
though only Japan has more flexibility in wages and prices than we do.
We're the most favored country in the world to get the inflation rate
down and yet the outlook is that it's not there.
It seems to me that the conclusion one can draw from this is
that monetary policy in 1992 was really not as stringent as we thought

7/6-7/93

-40-

it was. A year ago I was in the camp that thought 2-1/2 percent
[inflation] was possible and by February I'd given up and had gone
back above the 3 percent level. But my inflation forecast isn't an
outlier at all. It's just exactly the same as the staff forecast of
3.3 percent. But I consider this 3.3 percent in a period of such
favorable opportunity to mean that monetary policy has really missed
its restraining force, and I don't know what's going to happen to
cause that to change. It seems to me that monetary policy is indeed
getting easier and easier as inflation expectations rise.
I don't get letters too often, but here's a letter:
"My wife
and I have been married 51 years. We worked very hard for every penny
we earned and have been extremely frugal, saved for old age.
I can't
tell you how much I hate inflation for what it does to those savings.
Our circumstances dictate that they be invested conservatively and all
of the interest we've been getting from our investments is lower than
the rate of inflation. It is taxed as income, which is not taxation
but confiscation of capital."
Now, they go ahead and give me a little
bit of praise regarding my position on inflation, but they finish it
off and say "Although I'm not optimistic that you will be successful,
Well, I guess that's
I can't thank you enough for your efforts."
about it!
[Laughter]
You know, there's a lot of loose talk around. Everybody has
an opinion about gold prices. There's a lot of gold going into India
and it flows into India because clearly people there want to hold gold
rather than rupees, a paper currency that goes down in value. And
clearly gold is going into Indonesia and into China as people there
choose to hold a more reliable safeguard against these crazy paper
currencies that have terrible inflation rates. But the price of gold
isn't being affected by a little increase in the number of Chinese who
are buying gold. The price of gold is pretty well determined by us.
For many things, like land prices, long-term interest rates can have a
significant impact.
But the major impact upon the price of gold is
the opportunity cost of holding the U.S. dollar. No other currency
has a reserve base that causes someone to be able to say:
"Well, I
don't like holding my own currency."
If you don't like holding your
own currency, you always have the option of holding dollars instead.
But we set the stage. We have a low interest rate that causes this
saver out here to say he and his wife have been had. And I understand
how they've been had. We're in a period in which we're going to
increase some income taxes; but I'm not one who believes that people
who are making more than $250,000 a year are going to cut back their
consumption because their income tax rates go up. I think their
saving rate is going to come down. We're in a period of being
impacted by inflation expectations, and it shows up in the price of
gold. We've had a 20 percent increase in the price of gold since last
February's Humphrey-Hawkins meeting. Now, [yearly] world production
of gold only runs 2.3 percent of world stocks.
I thought it rather
dramatic--I had not thought about that with the price of gold at $390
an ounce--that the value of the world's stock of gold is a measly $1.4
trillion. Now, a lot of that is held by central banks. But we were
at one time in a restraining mode, making it unprofitable for central
banks to hold gold. But I think this year those who have held gold
have said they've got the best deal going as the [value of the]
world's gold stock has appreciated $234 billion since our February
meeting. We can hold the price of gold very easily; all we have to do
is to cause the opportunity cost in terms of interest rates and U.S.

7/6-7/93

-41-

Treasury bills to make it unprofitable to own gold. I don't know how
much change in the fed funds rate and the Treasury bill rate it takes
to do that, but I'd sure like to find out.
I'd like to have some education here. I certainly understand
the feeling [of those] on the Committee who would say:
Is this a time
to increase rates? I would tell you that I don't think this is a very
good time to increase interest rates.
But, unfortunately, our
interest rates are way too low, and there won't be a good time to
increase interest rates.
If we drive every household that saves
conservatively to buy stocks they don't feel they are knowledgeable
enough to buy or to buy junk bonds or whatever else--they ought not to
be trying to do radical things but if we drive them, and it's up to
us--then it seems to me that if we then ever have to catch up on
interest rates, those investments in common stocks and junk bonds
could really fall off the table. Talk about a mess you don't want to
be in!
I don't want to be in that mess.
If we had been very, very
lucky and the rate of inflation had gone down to 2 percent, we might
have gotten by with a 3 percent fed funds rate. But we didn't get
that lucky and, consequently, we now have a fed funds rate that is
just clearly out of sight in regard to world reasonableness. And it
seems to me that there ought to be some real thought on our part as to
whether our job is to decide which way to change rates or where rates
should be to provide stability for people like this man who have their
savings all there together. I better stop.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Let me say first of all that it's clear that
this first-quarter slowdown we've had seems to be a return to a
pattern of slower growth--you could call it moderate growth if you
like--[near the] 2-1/2 percent rate that we've averaged over the last
18 months. I don't have the same sense that I might have had a year
ago that we're going to lapse back into negative real growth. There
has been considerable job creation; we have had enough job creation to
lower the unemployment rate over the last year, but we're just barely
keeping up with the demographics, so the unemployment rate hasn't gone
down. There are some real areas of strength or potential strength:
autos, housing, durables, capital equipment. But, again, I'm really
quite struck, as I listen to everybody talk, by the big differences
from region to region. And the uncertainties that remain are really
quite considerable:
the continued layoffs; the deficits of federal,
state, and local governments; the whole restructuring process; and the
international weaknesses. The uncertainty is casting a pall over
spending and the expansion of investment. We are getting investment
for capital equipment, but the focus is on productivity and
efficiency; it's not as much on expansion [of capacity].
I think it's quite appropriate that we've spent as much time
as we have this afternoon on inflation--the increased emphasis in the
Greenbook and the increased emphasis and analysis in the Chart Show
presentation on inflation. It is feasible that we could have some
additional progress but I think it's quite right--and I've forgotten
who said it--that any additional gains in inflation are going to be
extremely hard to come by. As the recovery continues, manufacturers
and distributors are going to continue to try to make those price
increases stick. It's going to be incumbent upon us to try to discern
whether or not some of these short-term supply distortions that we

7/6-7/93

-42-

have seen are short term, as Tom described in the case of cement or
lumber, or whether [the suppliers] are going to be able to increase
prices and make them stick generally. I don't think we know the
bottom line yet of how the weather situation is going to affect our
inflationary situation. The deceleration in labor costs appears to be
leveling and we've not seen much break in this inflation psychology
that has been discussed as we look forward and move away from trying
to look back at where we've been on inflation. We've seen a
ratcheting up in inflationary expectations in the consumer confidence
indexes and also in the steepness of the yield curve. David described
a couple of bouts that we've had recently on inflation expectations.
I find this very anomalous.
If people really expected inflation to
start rampaging, we would start to see consistent shifting into real
assets. We're not seeing that so much in this country. We've not
seen it in housing. We've seen it some in durables, but one could
probably explain that as the replacement of old cars or on the
business side as firms trying to deal with improved productivity. We
have a ways to go in terms of dealing with inflation, and we need to
keep working on the analysis of inflation because I don't think we
have a full handle on it.
I also hope that we will continue to work on the monetary
There is a concept of
I agree with Governor Angell:
aggregates.
money that should be our guidepost. Our problem is that we don't have
it well measured. We don't really know how to measure it, in part
because of this [admixture] of capital and money accounts.
So, I
continue to hope that we will focus on that; maybe M2+ isn't the right
measure, but I do think we need to keep working on that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Governor Lindsey will round it up.

See, you weren't last!
I wasn't last!

MR. LINDSEY. I thought the Chart Show was very, very
interesting, particularly on why inflation has picked up. It reminded
me a bit of the story of a tenth here or a tenth there and that pretty
Interestingly, Charlie Schultz when he was
much explains it.
explaining what happened in the Carter Administration described
something very similar. He said suppose we raise the minimum wage,
what's that going to cost us? He estimated about a tenth. And the
next idea to come down the track will cost about a tenth. So a tenth
here and a tenth there sounds pretty much like what happened in 1978.
It adds up, though. The staff has raised its forecast for 1993
inflation by seven-tenths. On average at this table we've raised ours
five-tenths. And the Michigan survey is up six-tenths. This is all
from the beginning of the year. I think we also should look a little
bit at other prices. Jerry Jordan mentioned that farm land prices are
going up. I also sense that-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
survey did not show that.

I must say that the Chicago Bank's

MR. KEEHN. That's right. Jerry Jordan is saying they've
gone up in his District; they have not gone up to that extent in our
District.

7/6-7/93

-43-

MR. LINDSEY.
MR. KEEHN.

Yes, but you are all under water!
It's highly liquid!

MR. LINDSEY. I worked to register wetlands. The definition
of a wetland is something that has pooled water on it for 14 days out
And that's the entire state of Iowa
of the year or is spongy for 21.
at this point.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Switch to rice!

MR. LINDSEY. Yes, switch to rice. Well, enough of that. On
the inflation side, [our central tendency] is 3.1 percent. I think
we're going to be lucky to hit that. To get 3.1 percent for a year we
can have 30 tenths over the 12 months. We've had 17 of those tenths
in the first five months, which means we've got to go from an average
of 3.4 percent to an average of 1.8 percent, or cut our inflation in
half for the next seven months, to hit our forecast. So, if you ask
where the risks are, I think they're on [the side of] higher
inflation. Let me also say that I agree with John LaWare and others
that the risks are on the down side for the economy. Why? Well, the
staff has estimated that the budget will be a $37 billion drag on the
economy in '94.
Is that fiscal 1994?
MR. PRELL.

Yes, but that's not total budget, that's--

MR. LINDSEY.
MR. PRELL.

That's an incremental fiscal drag.
Right, those programs--

MR. LINDSEY. Yes, it's an incremental fiscal drag of sixtenths of a percent of GDP. Roughly the first year multiplier on
fiscal drag is close to one; it probably goes up a little after that.
So, that means we're going to knock off six-tenths of a percent from
whatever [rate the economy] would have grown--I don't know what that
rate would have been but we're talking about a number between 2-1/2
and 3 percent--just from normal old fiscal drag. If I knock sixtenths off, I don't get our median forecast; I get something below
that.
So, again, I think the risks are on the down side. Nor do I
think that this is your run-of-the-mill fiscal drag. I think this is
putting the economy in chains; in fact everyone around the table
mentioned it.
This is not a normal tax increase; it's a tax increase
on small business in addition to which we're shutting down the defense
sector and the health care sector. When you have a targeted fiscal
drag, the capacity for individuals who lose their jobs to find jobs in
other sectors quickly is reduced relative to an across the board
fiscal drag where, say, it takes $100 out of everyone's pocket. So, I
think the downside risks for next year are substantially more than
what we are talking about here. At the same time, the risks of
inflation are also more than what we have here. That adds up to John
LaWare's forecast of stagflation. I would [agree with] his prediction
that the deficit will not go down by as much as is being predicted by
the Administration and I'm willing to take bets with anyone around the
table on that one.
MS. PHILLIPS.

You're not going to get any takers.

7/6-7/93

-44-

MR. LINDSEY. I'm not going to get any takers! What do we do
if we have stagflation? Well, how did we get out of the problem the
last time we had stagflation? The first point is that the basic
solution is not monetary policy; it is fiscal policy. It is not to do
the things that everyone around the table mentioned are going to be
the problems. The 19 of us don't have any votes on that, so we may as
I would again
well forget that. What else does monetary policy do?
commend the way we got out of the last stagflation. While we do the
right thing on fiscal policy we also hold the line on prices because
So, I don't like
if we don't, then the easy path out is more obvious.
the situation we're in any better than anyone else.
It is only going
to be worse next year; it is not going to get any better. And on that
cheery note, I will commend exactly what President Syron said, Mr.
Chairman:
Given that we don't have any easy way out and you're the
one who has to go up there and wheedle your way through the
[Congressional] Committee, I will defer to your sense of logic on what
will appeal to them to get you through it. But I do think that we
should also have to face the fact that for us to make the tough call
it is only going to become more difficult as time goes on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you all. I trust you all remember
that we have a 7:30 engagement at the British Embassy and it is now
6:16 p.m. I will properly adjourn and we will continue the meeting
tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.
[Meeting recessed]

7/6-7/93

-45-

July 7, 1993--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[I want to wait until] lunch to discuss
the question of how we handle the issue of leaks.
Since it has very
little, if anything, to do with Bill [Wiles's] luncheon agenda, it
strikes me that we probably could get more done by having a general
open discussion on how we want to handle this sort of thing. So if
you wouldn't mind, I think we will just will stay in [session] through
lunch rather than [adjourn].
I'd like to call on Don Kohn to start
our discussion on the longer-run ranges.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. After my recent
experience I'm tempted to say that the hour exam will cover both the
lecture material and the texts, Bluebook and Greenbook!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Do you grade on a curve?

MR. KOHN. Actually a few aides will be grading this, Henry
Gonzalez and Don Riegle.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
it's not a normal curve!

One thing that's sure about it is that

MR. KOHN. The first lesson will be on IS-LM and Phillips
curves, starting on page 8 of the Bluebook.
[Statement--see
Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Questions for Don?

MR. ANGELL. Don, suppose we ended up adopting alternative II
or alternative III for 1993 and 1994 and there was a surprisingly
strong resumption of disinflation and the CPI numbers moved down more
like they are projected in the tighter scenario II on page 8 of the
Bluebook.
In that circumstance if the Committee decided to [move]
against too rapid a pace of disinflation and lowered the fed funds
rate, is it likely that we would have a problem of getting monetary
growth above those ranges in alternative II or alternative III?
MR. KOHN. I doubt it.
The question here is if short-term
rates went down whether long-term rates also would be going down
because of disinflation.
MR. ANGELL.
down even more.

Yes, I would think long-term rates would come

MR. KOHN. Right. That could give a pretty good push to
money. I agree with the thrust of what you're saying. It's hard to
determine; we don't have much experience with yield curve-type
variables.
On the one hand, we could see the decline in long-term
rates; there would be [unintelligible] capital gains and that might
damp M2 for a while. But I think a flatter yield curve would help.
Now, depending on how much short-term rates went down at the same
time, I think such a [structure] would tend to push up M2; whether it
You might
would violate a 3 or 4 percent upper limit [I don't know].
have trouble on the 4 percent upper end of alternative III. It's
possible it could be pushed up there, but it would take a lot more
interest [rate] response than we've seen from M2 recently. But your
general presumption that having long-term rates go down and short-term

7/6-7/93

-46-

rates go down would push in that direction I think is correct.
just a question of how fast and how hard it would push.

It's

MR. ANGELL. So what interest rate or what possible shape of
the yield curve might likely result in getting outside the range on
the top side on alternative III?
MR. KOHN. I guess it would have to be a sharp decline in
both long- and short-term rates.
It would depend on the size of that
[decline], with the yield curve effect pushing money out of M2 but the
I'm sorry, but
short-term interest rate effect pulling money in.
partly because I don't have much confidence in our projections of
these elasticities I don't have a good notion of how far interest
rates would have to drop to do that. My guess is that both long- and
short-term rates would have to drop quite a distance to push M2 growth
beyond 4 percent.
MR. ANGELL.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I'd like to go a little further out in time if
I could. This would be in a world where the transitional effects of
new financial products have disappeared and we have a stable interest
rate environment and we have discovered a new M2, which may turn out
to be the same M2 or M2+ or M2- or the square root of M2 or something
like that! What is your sense of the relationship that that money
aggregate would have with respect to nominal GNP?
MR. KOHN. Our presumption, Governor Lindsey, was that as we
got out into the years '96, '97, '98, that is "after a while"-MR. LINDSEY.

"After a while."

MR. KOHN. -- that some of these shifts would be over, that
people would have adjusted and that something like an M2 aggregate
would reemerge with the old relationship to nominal GDP. That is, it
would react somewhat the same way with respect to interest rates and
income. Obviously, we can't know in advance what that would be like.
The other point I'd like to make is that I think we sometimes risk
idealizing the way M2 used to be. This Committee violated
deliberately or ran very high in its M2 ranges frequently in the '80s
and ran low sometimes as it moved interest rates against the thrust of
changes in spending. It did a pretty good job moving M2 around and
stabilizing nominal GDP. So M2 velocities from year to year always
were highly variable; one could make an argument that stabilizing
nominal GDP, given shifts in spending, forced the Committee to have
variable M2s and variable velocities.
The notion of M2 we came to
toward the end of the '80s was that even if there were questions
raised about it year to year, the Committee should at least examine
what it was doing if M2 seemed to deviate a lot up or a lot down,
cumulated over long periods of time--the old P* notion. And the
innovations of the last two years have called even long-term stability
into question. I think it's quite possible that over time long-term
stability will reemerge to a certain extent, but I don't think we'll
ever have a short-run relationship such that the Committee could count
on setting a tight M2 target for a given year and assume it would get

7/6-7/93

-47-

a particular nominal GDP for that year. M2 is just one of a number of
indicators of what is going on in the financial system.
MR. LINDSEY. Right. Given that we're talking about the
period after 1994, would you bet any money one way or the other on
whether the velocity trend would be positive or negative or zero?
MR. KOHN. Well, the logic of what I was saying is that it'll
return to something around zero.
MR. LINDSEY.

Right, okay.

MR. KOHN. I think the chances are, though, that there will
be continuing innovations. A lot depends on what happens to
depository institutions [and whether] they continue to shrink as a
proportion of total intermediation. It depends on whether you think
we're in a sort of stock adjustment period in terms of depository
credit or in a continuing decline. I lean toward the former rather
than the latter, but I certainly don't rule out the latter.
That is,
I think there will be a nub of credit [extensions] that depositories
are well suited to making and will continue to make. Now, if they
start securitizing small business loans and that sort of thing,
depository institutions may just continue to fade as important
intermediaries, in which case the upward trend in M2 velocity would
continue for quite some time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Don, I have a question which is a bit pedagogic
in nature; it has to do with how we communicate. The place I start is
that regardless of which of these alternatives we choose, I don't
think it's going to have much effect, at least in the shorter term or
in what one might call the intermediate term through '94 and '95 and
maybe '96, just given where we are on all of these things. Therefore,
I think the question is how in this terribly difficult period we
convey to Congress and the markets and the public as a whole what we
are trying to do here. The question I had is:
Given the increased
difficulty we've had, because of unstable velocity, in setting a range
for any aggregate, has that in your mind been associated with an
increase in the expected variance of velocities?
What I'm coming to
is whether there is an intellectual case here for a wider range.
MR. KOHN. I think there is an intellectual case in the
following sense:
In my response to Governor Lindsey I said there are
questions about the underlying trends in the economy and the
depository sector; we're not tied down to something like a V* that we
thought was constant. On the other hand, as I noted in my remarks, we
haven't been that far off in our predictions of velocity and M2.
Our
annual predictions have been remarkably close though some of that is
offsetting errors, which I'd be the first to admit. But even the
velocity predictions since the middle of last year, when we sort of
caught on to what was going on, have been off by maybe a percentage
point or less on a half-yearly basis. So, my guess is that it is no
more and may be even less than we had in the '80s when we thought we
had a stable range over the long term. So, in theory, you're right.
If you don't know where things are going to go, where the equilibrium
is, you're more uncertain about where you are in every year. On the
other hand, we do understand something about these processes; we think

7/6-7/93

-48-

we do anyhow. And I'm not sure we're much more uncertain about the
second half of 1993 than we were about the second half of 1986 or
1985.
MR. SYRON. My concern isn't from a policy perspective or
what you've done here; it's a concern I have from a communications
perspective.
MR. KOHN.
job communicating.

Well, I think the Chairman has done a very good

MR. SYRON. I agree with that.
But I think the difficulty we
have is that if we keep changing the ranges and we don't think we can
hit [them] where we [want to] change them and we change them part of
the way, what does it get us in an absolute sense?
MR. KOHN. Right. Well, in some sense, that's what drove me
to put in those very low ranges, 0 to 4 percent or whatever.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I think this issue is
significantly diffused from where it was six months ago.
I think our
big fight was six months ago and, frankly, the behavior of velocity at
this stage has so undercut those who are arguing that M2 is a
meaningful notion that it's very hard for the pressure to be anywhere
near what it was. One can make the case that if velocity were what it
used to be and the relationships were what they used to be, real GDP
So,
would have been going straight down for a long period of time.
[given] the lower number we [set in February] on technical grounds, I
think we can basically do that [again] this time.
I must say I happen
to agree with Don that we might as well lower it so that they can use
that joke about the dart being thrown-MR. SYRON.

Draw the circle after it's thrown!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Draw the circle after you've thrown the
dart. I don't think this is a big issue. We may get attacked on it
for other reasons, but it's a very easy reed to knock down because
[our critics were] just so obviously wrong. If we stay where we are,
we then have the problem of a slight element of hypocrisy. But
frankly it's not a big deal either way and I don't think we'll have
trouble defending whatever we do.
MR. ANGELL.

Are you arguing for alternative III rather than

II?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.
still undershoot?

Do you have any concern if we go to II and then

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

No, I'm arguing for II.

Sure, and then we go to III.

Okay.

MR. FORRESTAL.

Are you talking about 1993 or 1994?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I was talking about both.

-49-

7/6-7/93

MR. SYRON. But you think it's still desirable to maintain
the current width of the range?
MR. ANGELL.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, because we cannot simultaneously
argue that the M2 data clearly are deficient for the moment and for
the interim period. Once we start to get sophisticated about that and
try to make it better than it is, presuming there's more there than
we're trying to say-MR. SYRON.

But any change presumes that we know something.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, we know something, namely that the
technical reasons for the deviations in velocity have, if anything,
been somewhat stronger than we would have expected. And that clearly
I would also argue, and I
would require this type of adjustment.
think it's probably desirable [to do so] in testimony, that when the
balance sheet strain is removed and we're getting more normal funding
of GDP from credit markets as distinct from cash flow, one would
presume we'll get a more normal relationship at that point. I think
It surely
we have to be very sensitive to [when we expect] that.
And the one thing we can't do is to say that M2 is
isn't '93 or '94.
basically worthless, that we don't think there's any other new track
That gets us into unnecessary
that we can [unintelligible].
discussions. We can talk about M2, or M2+, or the square root of M2,
which I like--that has some real pizzazz to it.
But I think we've
just got to stay with the technical problem at present and battle it
through, because I think it's going to be easier this time.
President
Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Don, I'd like to go back to page 8 of the
Bluebook. In developing the tighter scenario did you take any account
of credibility effects?
And if not, would it be fair to say that the
outcomes for real GDP and the unemployment rate, especially in the
early years, were on the more pessimistic side of the range of
possible outcomes?
MR. KOHN. No, President Broaddus, we did not take account of
credibility effects, as I think we put in a footnote on the next page.
The tighter and easier scenarios were keyed off of the baseline. And
since the baseline is like the Greenbook forecast, as you discussed
yesterday it is a little more pessimistic on inflation relative to
output. That carried through in a sense to the tighter and easier
alternatives. You're right that if we had some credibility effects we
could get inflation down faster for the same output or we could get
higher output for the same inflation gain. I think the evidence on
that in the past has been mixed. We may be on the verge of getting
some [credibility effects] beyond what we've gotten so far. But we
did not assume changes in credibility [in the tighter scenario] nor
did we assume that losses in credibility on the easier side would
adversely affect the numbers.
MR. PRELL. It's hard to look at the recent period, which has
been concerning all of us, and [say that] if strong credibility had
been established--if there were absolute credibility that we would
bring things back quickly into line--people would have discounted the
recent signs of inflationary pressure. So, despite a long period now,

7/6-7/93

-50-

the evidence of our having gained a lot
this tradeoff is pretty limited.
MR. BROADDUS.

[of credibility] in affecting

We'll have to take another step, I guess.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. You stated that you'd be emphasizing the
technical nature of the adjustments if we adopted alternative II.
Would there also be an attempt to talk a little about the longer term
and the fact that these ranges could well be consistent with longerterm expectations or do you think that would be premature?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's premature because once we
start to do that, we're conveying a level of insight which I don't
think we have. We're not even sure that the definition of M2 will
hold into 1995.
So, I think we ought to fudge on that; the reason is
that I see very little advantage in doing that because it's not
credible. We can't on the one hand say that M2 is a highly deficient
indicator and then put any substance on the potential meaning of the
ranges.
MR. PARRY. Except that if one talks about the long term,
that certainly wouldn't indicate that one thinks there is a short-term
applicability. And if we are, in effect, unwilling to talk about the
long term and we think this is a problem that is going to persist
forever, why are we doing what we're doing?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the reason why I think we have to
suggest that, in our judgment, when the balance sheet adjustments come
to an end there's every expectation--presuming that the depository
institutions are not in a severe downward contraction--M2 or something
close to it will again be restored to the more normal velocity
relationship with the economy and that at that point we will have far
more confidence in the usefulness of this proxy for monetary policy.
MR. PARRY.

It may be

constructive then

to say:

By the

way,

this range is probably pretty much consistent with that and reasonable
price stability as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
to come out.

That presupposes where the M2 is going

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I think the tighter M2 path, which
as I was discussing with Governor Lindsey had underlying it the notion
that things would come back to more normal alignment, suggests the
difficulty of doing that.
We have 4 and 4-3/4 percent M2 growth
partly because the yield curve is flattening. I think that's the
other factor, as you mentioned before. If the yield curve is
flattening from its highly unusual alignment right now, then that
process--it's sort of what Governor Angell has been saying--will push
up the M2 growth at least for a time. So, it's hard to know what's
consistent with price stability.
MR. KEEHN. Would you be uncomfortable going into the
testimony simply saying that we continue to move through this period
of extreme uncertainty. We will obviously continue to follow the
aggregates very, very closely, but in an interim period to make a

7/6-7/93

change to reduce the ranges implies some level of certainty that we
just simply don't have. And then leave it as it is now. I guess my
questions are:
(a) Would you be uncomfortable in taking that kind of
position; and (b) What are the risks?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. First of all, I don't think it's
necessary to do it.
I would feel uncomfortable because we are trying
to forecast M2. We're basically forecasting it by ad hoc adjustments
to velocity, but we are forecasting it.
If the Congress insists on
our focusing on this issue and we have been committed statutorily to
actually making these projections, I would feel uncomfortable
basically saying that all this stuff is nonsense and why are we doing
it.
That's because the next argument, if we leave the ranges
unchanged and are saying they're not worth anything, [relates to] why
are we publishing them. Are we not deluding the public? But what
we're doing is that we're trying to forecast M2. What we are saying
is that the old relationship of M2 to the economy has broken down but
we're still forecasting M2 and it's better to try to forecast it and
improve the chances to get actual growth in the range than basically
to say we're not even trying. I think the crucial question is not
this at all. The crucial question is the relationship between M2 and
the economy. And if we argue wholly on technical grounds that we are
forecasting M2 as required and our best estimate is 1 or 2 percent
[growth] and the range we're setting is 1 to 5 percent, for example,
then at least we're forecasting the M2. We're not saying it means all
that much and we've argued that it doesn't mean very much, but at
least we're not saying it means nothing. It's not a big deal but if
you ask me if I would feel more comfortable going up there with 1 to 5
percent than no change and saying the thing doesn't matter, I must say
I'd feel a little more comfortable with the 1 to 5 percent range. If
it's the Committee's view that we should do nothing, then I wouldn't
find that I'm unable to make that case; it's just that I've got to
think it's a weaker case. Governor Lindsey.
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, it's my opinion that many out
there view the M2 target as similar to or actually in lieu of a
nominal GNP target because we are not asked for the nominal GNP
target. And this would be across the spectrum, say, from Milton
Friedman to Paul Sarbanes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
your left!
MR. LINDSEY.
widespread view--

You've just disturbed your colleague to

In that case, and I do think that's a

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm sorry, what is a widespread view?

MR. LINDSEY. That our announced M2 target range is a proxy
for our nominal GNP target range because there is a continuing
perception, based on history, that over the long run the trend
velocity is zero.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
otherwise.

That would be true if we didn't say

MR. LINDSEY. Also, when the trend reasserts itself--while no
one is betting any money for sure--our best guess of the trend in the

7/6-7/93

-52-

long-term future is zero. Lowering the target range now, therefore,
invites one or possibly two charges. The first is that we have
lowered our nominal GNP target now to a midpoint of 3 percent and not
a midpoint of 4 percent. And I think 3 percent is probably a low
target for nominal GNP. Or, even if we can get around that problem-and I'm sure you can in the testimony--when we finally get to the long
run, it will be necessary for this Committee, I think, to raise the M2
I don't know in what
target in order to hit the nominal GNP target.
year that will come, but I'm very much worried that it would send the
signal that we are backing off on inflation. So I would prefer to
keep the 2 to 6 percent range--though I understand what you're saying
--to avoid the short-run charge that we're cutting our nominal GNP
target and to avoid a long-term risk of re-raising the target range
and, therefore, looking weak on inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm not sure I agree with that. I think
we're talking about 1995; that's the period. At that point we will
either be credible on the inflation issue or we will have failed. And
I'm not sure that what we're doing on this range will make all that
much difference.
MR. LINDSEY. Credibility on inflation?
Let's take the
baseline CPI projection in the Bluebook. Assuming that comes true, we
will have had 3.3, 3.1, and 2.9 percent. What are we credible on?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Look, you're raising an issue of what we
will be doing with respect to the ranges two years from now. I don't
even know whether or not the M2 we'll be using is the right [measure].
I would not want to say, because I'm not sure we really know, that the
best estimate of velocity change is zero.
I would say it's a guess.
I wouldn't even dignify it with the concept of a forecast at this
point. It's a very loose sequence of events. And the [point] is to
preserve a position of the type that we want to preserve. I don't
disagree with the obvious logic you're raising, but it presupposes a
number of possibilities which I think [involve] very wide ranges of
error. If you took the present value of being in that position two
years from now, I'm not sure that I'd give it very much value. I
think it [has to be viewed as] a very highly discounted position.
If
you're asking me if the events turn out the way you suggest would the
proposition you're making now be the wise one, the answer is yes.
I
would agree with that. The trouble I have is that it's much too
President Hoenig.
dubious a forecast to rest on.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I understand where you're coming
from with regard to moving these targets now. I have some concern
because we have spent a lot of time talking about the uncertainty of
these M numbers and where they're going and trying to discount them in
a sense as targets.
If we now go in and lower the targets, I think we
are risking a great deal in the sense that if we change the targets,
[the implication is that] we must know something; that will be the
presumption if we bring it down. If we aren't sure at this point,
aren't we better to say we aren't sure and that, therefore, we're
leaving the range unchanged until we know more, rather than raising
suspicions?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would basically say that the staff's
best estimate is that the rise in velocity will continue. If that is
in fact the case, our best shot at this point is to lower [the range].

7/6-7/93

-53-

That is not [intended] to create a view that this is all that
important. All we're doing is forecasting M2.
So long as we maintain
the position that the relationship between M2 and everything else is
unattached, then this argument is an academic argument that doesn't
have legs.
MR. HOENIG. But what we are then doing is changing the
concept from one of targeting to one of forecasting where M2 might be
given [emerging] circumstances--some of which are out of our control-in terms of its velocity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have to emphasize up front
what we have done. And, indeed, the staff's velocity forecasts have
not been bad. Basically, what we have to do is to argue that this
association has occurred and it would be more [prudent] policy to
[base] our judgments on this. But we continue monitoring the money
supply; indeed, we should. And in our judgment, or basically the
staff's judgment since we want to make it a technical issue, we would
be more likely to be right with a somewhat lower cone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I have a lot of sympathy for what Larry Lindsey
said. I could live with what you're proposing, Alan, and I think it
can be explained that way. I think the other way can be explained as
well. I have trouble with the concept that all this is useful; in a
sense M2 ranges for the next 12 or 18 months were really never all
that helpful in that velocity over those periods of time could be
quite volatile. Probably where it was useful, in my mind, was in a
very long-term perspective with zero trend velocity over those periods
of time and [an expectation that] gradually we'd get down to some
range that was consistent with price stability. In that context,
then, as Larry explained, we open ourselves up to the arguments about
what sort of nominal GDP we are in effect projecting. And possibly we
get into this problem of eventually having this bounce around. Then
what does that mean? Up until recently my own view has always been to
work the range down gradually to where we think we ought to be in a
longer-term context and then leave it there; and if we're going to
miss, we explain the misses. So, my preference would be to leave it
I can live with what you're
and explain that we're going to miss.
proposing but it raises a question as to how we convey our longer-term
intentions to the public and what they can look at as some sort of
indicator. Right now, of course, there isn't any. If they want to
know, there isn't any.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, Tom, as I said, that is a valid
argument.
It's not one that can be readily undercut. It's a judgment
as to what particular strategy we wish to work our way toward.
MR. MELZER.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ultimately, if money gets back [on
track] and becomes viable again, we're going to have to make a
judgment as to what particular level we want to maintain for the long
term. We can basically say that. And if the question comes up, I
will not argue that this is a long-term projection. I'd say, indeed,
that when we have a much better fix on M2 or whatever the money supply

7/6-7/93

-54-

variable will be, we then have to view the question of what the
I don't see what else we can do.
appropriate ranges are.
MR. MELZER. Given that this is essentially a forecast for
this horizon--if I heard you correctly, you sort of detach it from the
policy debate by saying it's purely technical and it's a forecast-then even if we miss this lower range, that doesn't imply any policy
response.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, if you argue--as I would intend
to if the Committee wishes me to--that this is a wholly technical
question and is disassociated from the economy, I would be
continuously emphasizing the fact that policy has to be based on
looking at a broader set of underlying financial and economic
conditions and that we are bereft of this proxy at this particular
stage. We hope it will come back; in fact, one form of it or another
almost surely will come back after the [ongoing] balance sheet
adjustments are completed. But it's premature to make a judgment as
to when that might be. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Well, I just want to support Larry's and Tom's
position. They really made the points I want to make. From my
standpoint, the real purpose of this longer-term range is to signal
our continuing commitment to our longer-term objective and, at least
as importantly, the steadiness with which we [plan to] pursue it.
With that in mind, if we lower the range in the middle of the year to
chase an unexpected shortfall in M2, I think we risk muddying the
waters and muddling that message.
same for]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How would you argue on keeping it [the
this year and lowering it next year?

MR. BROADDUS. I would support that.
I'd like to see us keep
it [the same] this year and lower it perhaps a half point further next
year. That would seem to me to be consistent with the steady approach
we have taken and tried to sell.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

In general I support the notion of putting this
MR. BOEHNE.
in the realm of a technical adjustment.
But I would like to pursue a
couple of aspects of that. As I understand it, what you're going to
say is--and these are my words, not yours--that the relationship
between M2 and the economy has broken down. We know that it has
broken down in the direction of higher velocity; that is, we know
something, but we don't know a lot.
Point one is that it seems to me
one has to know more to make a change than to keep something the same,
so it's a matter of judgment as to whether we know enough to make that
change. The second point is that you say that we're forecasting M2
but we're not targeting M2.
So, how do you then answer the question:
You know enough to lower [the range for] it and you know enough to
forecast it, but it is a monetary aggregate and, as a central bank,
can't you influence it at all? And if you can influence it at all,
why don't you try? So why doesn't this forecast have some element of
target to it? I think what you're really saying is that we're just
forecasting it; we're not trying to target it. But it seems to me
we're in a grey area here where we know enough to do what we're doing
but we don't know enough to influence it.

-55-

7/6-7/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's the other side of the
argument; that is a legitimate argument. And the question basically
is whether we want to be wholly agnostic on the potential pattern of
M2 or whether we want to make some judgments about it. As I said, I
would lean to saying something about it if we want to and indicating
that we haven't completely abandoned any view of monetary targeting.
But it's a close argument.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, it seems to me you're going to have to do
more explaining and answer more questions--there's nothing wrong with
that--if we make a change, especially for this year, than if we don't.
I agree it's a close call and you're the one who has to [testify].
And it's a close enough call-What are the pros
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me ask Don:
and cons of staying where we are this year and lowering it tentatively
for next year?
MR. KOHN. I'm fairly confident, which isn't very confident I
agree, that we are going to come in under the range this year. You
could always say that. When we wrote our Humphrey-Hawkins report last
year, the experience of writing it was that it was difficult to say
we've got this range but we're ignoring it. Well, why do you have the
range? You changed it in February; you thought you knew enough in
It conveys something about our longer-run
February to change it.
intentions, but it doesn't convey anything about what we want to do
this year or what we think will happen this year. We can write that;
we can do that, but it's a little more awkward than saying:
Well,
given the velocity developments in the first part of the year, we
think this is going to happen. I think there's an additional
vulnerability this time--and I don't know which way it cuts--which is
that M2 growth is 1 percentage point below the range and you have
revised down your nominal GDP forecast. So, Senator Sarbanes can get
religion again and say:
See, you missed that and you missed nominal
GDP at the same time. I'm not sure which way that cuts.
I think if
we don't lower the range and we miss it, then we are vulnerable.
If
we do lower the range, we're vulnerable to the question that Governor
Lindsey talked about: That is, does the lowering mean you've lowered
your nominal GDP? Well, we have a little. But even if we don't lower
the range-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Not now.

MR. KOHN. --and start falling short, we're vulnerable to the
continuing flow of letters over this half of the year. So, it really
is somewhat of a tossup.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say that I don't feel strongly
about this issue because, frankly, I think we had our fiercest battle
six months ago and I think we came out on the right side of that.
I
don't think the pressure is there. Either way it's a club to beat on
us and they like to beat on us.
The question is where do we want our
head to be when they take a swing at us!
[Laughter]
MR. BOEHNE.

Well, it's your head, so where do you want it?

MR. MELZER. Well, just picking up on Ed's point, rather than
[talking about] our ability to forecast lower growth a better defense

7/6-7/93

-56-

may be that we're not at all convinced at this point in time that in
the long run trend velocity won't return to zero.
I'm not saying it
will. We don't know that it will, but we don't know that it won't
either. And on that basis that's why we continue to set a range.
MR. ANGELL. But, Tom, it may very well be that when velocity
goes back to zero, it will go back to zero at a different level. That
is, when the rate of change of velocity goes to zero does it go back
to zero at that higher level or does the level go back?
It seems to
me that one might make a very good case here that it will go to zero
at that higher level, and I think that's what Don is suggesting. I
guess I don't understand why those who want to pursue a gradual
reduction of inflation that gets these numbers down--1 to 5 percent
There
certainly encompasses that picture--[object to a lower range].
is not a money projection out here that gets above 5 percent with that
kind of projection.
MR. MELZER.

I think where we end up may be for the wrong

reason.
MR. ANGELL. Now, if this Committee doesn't want to proceed
toward getting inflation down to zero, I think we ought to shut our
mouths and quit talking about price stability. I just don't
understand how we can talk about price stability as being desirable
and then not want to take the money range down [to where] with,
velocity returning to zero, it is consistent with price stability.
Doesn't 1 to 5
And it seems to me that 1 to 5 percent does that.
percent permit us a midpoint of 3--or even of 2 percent and then a
velocity of 3--and a nominal GDP of 5 percent?
It seems to me that
the velocity we're predicting is almost like targeting nominal GDP at
5 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, most of what I wanted to say has
already been said. I think you're quite right that the arguments are
very finely balanced here. Let me say first of all that it seems to
me we've been talking for a long time about the difficulties with M2
and the uncertainties surrounding it and that if we were to change the
range in midyear we would be drawing more attention to M2 than I think
it deserves. It really reflects more precision than we agree we have.
I think it would be desirable to lower the ranges for 1994, but I
think it would be better to let this year run and not change the
And more
ranges for 1993. We'll be accused of chasing M2.
importantly, in my mind that would just draw more attention to the
aggregate than it really deserves. Now, 1994 is a different question;
and I think we ought to announce that in February and not now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don, let me ask you a question of
probability. What is the probability, in your judgment, that M2 could
all of a sudden accelerate from here in the context, say, of the
In other words, basically,
economy continuing to move up modestly?
what is the probability that velocity will fall?
MR. KOHN. My judgment is that the probability would be
small, given the current shape of the yield curve.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

How small?

-57-

7/6-7/93

MR. KOHN.

A major acceleration in M2 growth?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there's another issue that nobody
here has raised that is implicit in what Governor Lindsey was talking
about. Suppose we were to lower the range and all of a sudden we get
a surge in M2; that would put us in a position where velocity is going
in the wrong direction and it was an awful forecast. M2 would still
be disassociated, but that's a different type of disassociation.
MR. KOHN. I guess I don't see those forces [that are
affecting M2] abating. As I've said, I think the risks on our
forecast are balanced. I think there's some possibility that M2 could
come out around 2 percent, but to have a big surge would be highly
unlikely given what we know is happening with mutual funds, sales in
bank offices, and-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
stock market-MR. KOHN.

Yes, I understand that.

And then if the

If the trend of the stock market--

MS. PHILLIPS.

If there were a stock market correction--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Then everybody would rush out of mutual

funds.
MR. KOHN. That's possible. And that would be a good example
of an M2 surge which you'd certainly want to accommodate. If the
stock market were dropping, you'd have trouble explaining why you
weren't reacting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's one of the reasons one
would want 2 to 6 percent instead of 1 to 5 percent. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Well, I have some considerable sympathy for the
position you described initially, especially for 1994, for the reasons
that have been discussed. In addition, if the staff is right and
we're going to get M2 growth this year of about 1 percent, it seems to
me that next year's range at least ought to embody that or we're
making a rather strange commentary on the way things are turning out
this year. For 1993, I don't have a strong view about what to do with
the ranges. We've done it both ways in history; that is, we've either
undershot or overshot kind of knowingly and haven't reacted--haven't
changed the ranges. But I wouldn't be troubled in this case if we
did. There probably is a pretty good case for changing the range.
Beyond those two years, 1993 and 1994, I must say at the moment that
I'm not very confident about making any presumptions about M2 or its
velocity. In thinking about some of the work that was done with
regard to M2+, if you believe that the stock and bond mutual funds
really are good substitutes for some of those components in M2--and I
guess I do--and we came to the conclusion that we didn't want to
construct an aggregate at least at the moment that included those
[funds], the logic of that is that M2 itself perhaps was not a very
good aggregate in the first place.
It may be that in the long run
this all will wash out; that is, all the substitution will have been
But I'm not
done and we will get a cleaner, improved, or better M2.
in a position to reach that conclusion and I have a suspicion that
wherever we end up three or four years down the road, it may be with

7/6-7/93

-58-

something very different from the concepts we are currently talking
about. So, I'm not terribly troubled by the long-run implications of
whatever ranges we select at the moment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

MR. MULLINS. I doubt that M2 is worth this much time.
[Laughter]
I think the fundamental problem is a conflict between the
concept of mortal M2 and Governor Angell's hypothetical money [which
he talked about] yesterday and which we probably ought to call
imaginary money and explain as involving the square root of negative
1. But the discussion of where we should be long term and of nominal
GDP targets and the like all relate to that conceptual, hypothetical
money. The people who have shown up in town and argued that that
midpoint is a nominal GDP target can be shown to have been
demonstrably wrong empirically over last year. We've won that battle
and that's why we don't hear that anymore. We could have made a
decision early on either to keep the range long term, based upon this
hypothetical money case, or to make these technical adjustments. In
my view we made the decision in February to go with the technical
adjustments; and to the extent that we move back and forth or have
double elements in the message, we muddle the message. I think we've
been very successful in diffusing this whole argument this way. We
have had success in understanding and forecasting velocity shifts.
Our forecasts are much better than those of the critics. We started
down this path of adjustment and if we adjusted it in February, given
these sorts of forecasts, it's not clear why we wouldn't be adjusting
it this year unless maybe we're even tighter with these technical
adjustments.
So, my view is that we ought to be consistent and stick
with the battle we've won on this. Again, there's a lot of
uncertainty about the future. I don't think we know enough to bind
ourselves by the potential constraints out there.
I might add that
other central banks who do have credibility, like the Bundesbank, will
raise the ranges and lower them for technical reasons; they go both
ways. But it seems to me that we fought this battle on the technical
nature of this and won, and the safest thing to do is to stick with
it.
So, I'm way back with your initial proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. If we were to lower the range and if your
testimony could refer to the staff's expectation of an increase in
velocity and in addition an implied increase in velocity from the
economic projections, it seems to me it would go a long way in
answering Governor Lindsey's concerns.
said.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm sorry, I didn't quite get what you
Could you repeat that?

MR. PARRY. If you were to note that the staff is expecting
an increase in velocity and at the same time that our projections seem
to imply an increase in velocity as well, that would go a long way
toward alleviating the concerns that Governor Lindsey has that we in
effect have a lower nominal GDP target [when] we don't have a lower
GDP target.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

7/6-7/93

-59-

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I think this discussion indicates
that we can talk ourselves into or out of anything and, therefore, we
could probably talk anyone else into or out of anything.
[Laughter]
So, we've probably made too much out of it.
After hearing all this, I
have some substantial sympathy for leaving things alone right now and
doing next year whatever is going to be done for the following
reasons:
If we do make a change now, it's difficult to change it as
far as we need to and have a great deal of confidence that growth
would come in within the range this year. If we change to a range of
1 to 5 percent, the center of that being 3 percent, the GDP forecast-and I agree the forecast looks pretty good in this difficult world-the point forecast sets us up for the criticism that while we know
this is only a technical matter, we can neither control nor forecast
it. Maybe we could explain it given all those things we've talked
about.
So, in my mind if we were going to change the range, that
would [lead] us to Governor Angell's suggestion of going to where we
center-weighted it to alternative III. But then I think we would have
a problem:
What do we do next year from that?
So, that in my mind
argues for leaving things where they are right now and-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

What do you do for '94?

For '94 I would probably go to 1 to 5 percent.

MR. MULLINS.
How do you explain the fact that the forecast
is out of your range for 1993?
MR. SYRON. This, I admit, is a Hobson's choice; there is no
good answer here. I would say that there are uncertainties which
continue to evolve and that in our communications with the American
people and the Congress we don't want to come forward with a technical
forecast. We don't want to imply a degree of expertise in forecasting
this from a basis [akin to shifting] sands that is not accurate.
MR. MULLINS.

Our best guess is outside the range!

MR. SYRON. Our best guess is but we don't have sufficient
confidence in that best guess to imply that it could be interpreted
[as the basis for] controlling policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I would prefer to go with your original
proposal, which was to change the 1994 range to alternative II.
I
could live with alternative III, but alternative II is certainly a
compromise I'm willing to make.
If we're changing the tentative 1994
range in July of this year to 1 to 5 percent, it seems to me quite
reasonable to change this year's range to 1 to 5 percent because we
know there's just zero chance that it is going to be exceeded on the
top side for the rest of this year. It seems to me there will be less
of an impact to do '93 just like we're going to do '94.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I perceive very little difference
among us on substance. This is a matter of perception, and I think
David is right that we've already spent more time on this than we
should. I certainly would be comfortable for you to argue in the way

7/6-7/93

-60-

you are most comfortable with on this matter of perceptions. However,
for my part, if we change in the middle of the year for the succeeding
six months only, that would be the riskier course in the sense that I
think it runs the risk of changing the nature of the message that
we're sending. When we send a message out at the first of the year
about the succeeding year, it's the best forecast we can make. It
sets a benchmark similar to budgeting for the year; it gives a
benchmark against which to evaluate and analyze performance, analyze
events, and make comparisons. But when we change in the middle of the
year for the remaining six months based on six months' experience, I
think that changes the range into becoming a target.
Ed made that
point a while ago. And that sets up a whole different set of
dynamics. We're indicating that we're determined to hit that target
That puts pressure on us to
and that we think we know how to do it.
do it. And particularly given the dynamics of velocity that we've
discussed here, that is not something that I think we want to allow
ourselves to get into. Once again, I think it's a matter of which
argument you are most comfortable making, and I'll certainly support
you either way. But if I were the one who was going to go up and
present this testimony, I'd be more comfortable supporting no change
for this year and then changing over to alternative II for 1994.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. You raised a question a few minutes ago about
I had looked at
what the chances were of a sharp velocity decline.
the Bluebook table on page 8 and noted that the numbers imply
significant velocity declines in 1998.
I was trying to think my way
through what set of circumstances could produce that result even out
then, let alone this year and next year. We may not know much about
what should or shouldn't be in M2 or what's going on with its
velocity, but we do know that debits still equal credits--the two
sides of the balance sheet are still equal--and that will help guide
us a little. In order to have negative velocity, given that there is
little further potential for running off non-deposit liabilities of
the banking system and there is substantial potential for running off
security portfolios in order to accommodate loan demand, we somehow
have to imagine that total intermediation through the commercial
banking system--the total assets of the banking system corresponding
to those liabilities--have to rise relative to total spending in the
economy the way we measure things. I'm having a terrible time
imagining that circumstance coming about no matter what the yield
curve is doing. So, I think that we could put aside the idea of a
velocity decline even out in 1998.
I [unintelligible] something to
fill that case.
As for the ranges for this year and next year, very early in
this discussion Al Broaddus asked a question about credibility and
Mike and Don referred to that footnote on page 9. A part of what we
are trying to do is establish some credibility of a regime in which
people believe that any increases in inflation and interest rates are
temporary and they'll go back down so that the central bank
[unintelligible] them to do that. I don't see how it helps us to
start building on that credibility if we are below our target range
and are not trying--or claiming that we're trying--to do anything to
be within the range. So, whether we call this a target or a forecast
of what money is going to do, it's just arithmetic at this point for
1993. We have to lower the range and be willing to make these

7/6-7/93

-61-

[unintelligible] as they may be, just as a step to get our own
credibility up. When the focus is on this ratio of GDP to M we call
velocity, a lot of the discussion is about the denominator; in earlier
remarks, especially Larry Lindsey's remarks, it was that we were using
the denominator as a handle to try to hit the numerator. Well, I
don't think that we should be targeting nominal GDP, [unintelligible]
total spending. I have enough trouble with what's in the numerator in
measuring economic activity in today's world to think that we should
fiddle with the denominator to hit the numerator. A lot of this
discussion about velocity gets us off track.
Instead we ought to get
out [the message] more clearly that [our goal] is price level
stability--that we're going to stabilize the price level at some point
in the future. Whether we're fiddling with the fed funds rate or
fiddling with various reserve or money measures, [the message should
be] that we haven't lost our focus on stabilizing the price level.
And all of these other discussions about where we are on the Ms or
their velocities are sort of distractions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, this is much ado about little. I came to
the meeting with a slight preference for keeping the ranges unchanged
on the grounds that we have to know more to change something than to
leave it alone. But it's only a slight preference and I can easily go
with II or I. However, if we're going to change one, it would be
better to change both. If we're going to draw attention to it and
explain it on technical grounds, presumably we know more about the
next six months than we know about next year, particularly since we
think we're going to have more M2 growth next year than this year.
So, I would prefer either to stay the same or make the change for both
years.
MR. ANGELL.

That's a good point.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, for some reason this discussion
reminds me of the Aggie who failed to show up at home one night. He
came in the next morning and his wife asked him where he'd been. He
said:
Well, honey, I did actually come in last night but you were
already asleep and I didn't want to disturb you. So I slept in the
hammock on the back porch so I wouldn't wake you up, but I was here
all night.
She said:
You know, I sold that hammock two weeks ago.
And he said:
Well, that's my story and I'm sticking to it.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm waiting for the policy implication!

MR. MCTEER. My story in the past year has been that M2 has
been sluggish because money has been spilling out of the banking
system, primarily into stock and bond funds.
I think that's a story
we ought to keep alive because it's the only story we have. I think
we were a little hasty yesterday in dismissing this. It may be that
M2+ doesn't make an ideal substitute for M2 for the future, but even
though it's not satisfying econometrically, as Yogi Berra would say:
"You can observe a lot just by looking."
Just looking at what is
happening [tells us that] the banking system is shrinking; it's
becoming less important as an intermediary. When we talk about this

7/6-7/93

-62-

to the general public they understand it; they're all out there
seeking higher yields than they're getting at their banks.
I called
home last night and learned that my wife had just bought her first
lottery ticket. That's how far it's going right now! So, I think we
ought to keep that [story]-MS. PHILLIPS.
MR. KOHN.

Do we put that in M2?

That's M2++!

MR. MCTEER. We should put the kitchen sink in there if it
would stabilize velocity. So, my suggestion would be this:
We have
an opportunity now to lower the M2 target range to 1 to 5 percent,
let's say, for technical or arithmetic reasons. We can explain it;
we're going to miss any range that's higher than that anyway. Then,
having lowered it for 1993, we go ahead and lower it for 1994 at the
same time and we'll have it where we want it for the future. So, we
have an opportunity to lower it for technical reasons and have it
there for more fundamental policy reasons later. So, I would suggest
1 to 5 percent for 1993 and 1994.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Like others, I think, I certainly don't feel
strongly about this either. If I hear you correctly, you would be
reasonably comfortable either way on this; you don't feel very
strongly about it.
I must say I have a preference not to change the
range either for this year or next year.
If we did reduce the range
this year and made a technical adjustment, in the cool light of
hindsight, frankly, it seems to me that will be viewed as a mistake.
I think we simply ought to leave the range where it is, make the case
in the testimony that there's an awful lot of uncertainty, we're doing
a lot of work, and we will report back to the Congress as we develop
more information to shed some light on this issue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The only difference I would take on
that, Si, is that I feel a little uncomfortable about complete knownothingness on the issue. It's one thing to make a forecast which we
don't think has significant policy significance. It's another thing
to say we're absolutely at sea. If you listen to this discussion,
there's literally zero policy question here. It's all a perception of
how people are going to react to what we say. We're not talking about
real stuff. What we're talking about basically is whether we wish to
position ourselves into a know-nothing position. I personally feel
uncomfortable with that. If you told me I had to argue [the case], I
could argue it.
I would not feel as though it's a policy issue. But
it's strictly a style question. And knowing who we're dealing with up
on the Hill, I think it's a little better argument, frankly, to-change.

MR. KEEHN. You get the political reaction by not making a
We'll be worse off than--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't think so.
I sensed when I went
up there in February to make the technical argument that we had them
at a major disadvantage. The reason is that it's a really different
dialectic when somebody says this isn't working and somebody else is
trying to say it is.
If somebody says to me that M2 is really

7/6-7/93

-63-

important and I'm trying to say they're [wrong],
position [my argument] is much more plausible.
MR. KEEHN.

from a dialectic

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Well, I can certainly support the 1 to 5 percent
range for both the balance of this year and next year. I would have a
slight personal preference, if I were the one doing it, for leaving
the 1993 range where it is and then in my testimony going to some
length to discuss [our broad policy objectives] and simply say we're
trying to foreshadow the projected change for 1994 and if we confirm
this trend in velocity, then it would be appropriate to reduce the
range for 1994.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, that is one technical way of
coming at it; it's a good [point].
First Vice President Oltman.
MR. OLTMAN. I would go to 1 to 5 percent both for 1993 and
1994.
That was not my first instinct here. I started with a feeling
that changing the range at this point would imply that we know more
about the process than we do.
But I've been convinced by the argument
that this offers an opportunity to emphasize the technical nature of
this and to further the divestiture of the policy component.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I'd go ahead and lower the range to 1 to 5
percent for both 1993 and 1994.
We have a half a year of information
for 1993 and it seems to me that we'd look pretty foolish if we didn't
recognize that. And I'd vote for that [lower range] for 1994 because
I think it may in fact put us where we'd like to be for [substantive]
reasons.
I would urge, along the lines of President McTeer's
comments, that we have some discussion in the written testimony
somewhere on M2+ because I do think that helps in terms of the
explanation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree. I think that's absolutely
right.
In discussing what it is we know about M2, it's not zero; we
do know that something is there.
MS. PHILLIPS.

We know something, yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We're going to make an argument that
eventually it's more than likely to be restored but one has to be able
to understand the process involved. I think it's very important for
us to be very analytically sharp on what we think is happening
concurrent with our judgment that the relationship to the economy has
veered off for a protracted period. Look, we're the central bank. If
no one in the central bank understands what is happening to money, we
are in really serious trouble. What we have to say, basically, is
that we understand what's going on. Our presumption is that a
structural relationship shift has occurred for reasons x,y, and z.
Therefore, to target M2 as a monetary policy vehicle is temporarily
inappropriate.

7/6-7/93

-64-

MS. PHILLIPS. And from all of this analysis that we have
done this last year we have learned a lot more.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Exactly.
improved our status in that respect.

And I think we've basically

MR. LAWARE. Can we call one of them real M2 and the other
one nominal M2?
[Laughter]
MR. KELLEY.

How about unreal M2!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I like Governor Mullins' view of M2-i
because they are imaginary numbers.
I'm sorry, Gary Stern, I didn't
get down what your preference was.
MR. STERN.

My preference was your initial suggestion.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I realize that we can play this in a
number of different ways. I would argue two things.
One is that the
argument for going to 1 to 5 percent is persuasive, but I think the
argument to do it for both years is very persuasive.
In other words,
whatever we do, we ought to do for two years. And while we are
technically voting separately on each, I would urge us to consider the
implications of making this a highly technical issue. And in my
Can we
judgment we do it best by staying where we are [next year].
vote, separate votes?
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, why don't we vote on 1994 and then
after you announce that vote on 1993.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a very good point.
I would
propose 1 to 5 percent for M2 and the equivalent for M3 and debt for
1994.
MR. BERNARD. I guess we'd be using the wording in Option A,
which refers to retaining the '93 ranges as revised at this meeting.
"The
The first sentence of the paragraph would remain the same:
Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions
that will foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in
output."
And then [we'd use the language under] Option B starting at
the bottom of page 24 in the Bluebook:
"For 1994 the Committee agreed
on tentative ranges for monetary growth measured from the fourth
quarter of 1993 to the fourth quarter of 1994 of 1 to 5 percent for M2
and 0 to 4 percent for M3.
The Committee provisionally set the
monitoring range for growth of total domestic nonfinancial debt at 4
to 8 percent for 1994.
The behavior of the monetary aggregates will
continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price level
stability, movements in their velocities, and developments in the
economy and financial markets."
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, as I understand it, we're voting
on 1994 now, aren't we--just the bottom of page 24 as Norm read it?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is correct.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Acting Vice Chairman Mullins

Yes
Yes

Call the roll.

7/6-7/93

-65-

Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
First Vice President Oltman
Governor Phillips
President Stern

1993.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Would somebody move-MR. MULLINS.

BERNARD.

And I'd like to propose the same for

What do you mean "the same"?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

The same 1 to 5 percent on M2.

The 1 to 5 percent.

Do you want me to read [the language]

or just call

the roll?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Why don't you read it again.

MR. BERNARD. Again from page 24 at the top, entitled Option
2--Reduce Ranges: "In furtherance of these objectives the Committee at
this meeting lowered the ranges it had established in February for
growth of M2 and M3 to 1 to 5 percent and 0 to 4 percent respectively,
measured from the fourth quarter of 1992 to the fourth quarter of
1993.
The Committee anticipated that developments contributing to
unusual velocity increases would persist over the balance of the year
and that money growth within these lower ranges would be consistent
with its broad policy objectives. The monitoring range for growth of
total domestic nonfinancial debt also was lowered to 4 to 8 percent
for the year."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD. For 1993 then,
Chairman Greenspan
Acting Vice Chairman Mullins
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
First Vice President Oltman
Governor Phillips
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Okay.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

[Don.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

7/6-7/93

-66-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, let me just
raise a few issues that I think are relevant to this outlook.
It
strikes me that we clearly have been quite successful in diagnosing
the underlying causes of the problems that have been associated with
this economy.
I think we picked up the question of strain on balance
sheets very early on. We've tracked the forces that have engendered
mild disinflation and economic growth on a path somewhat above 2 to
2-1/2 percent. The general view which has been implicit in our
actions--essentially the stability of policy over this very long, I
guess almost historically long, period--is a view of the way the
economic system is functioning.
That view presupposes that it is
still going to take a while for the strain on balance sheets to work
its way out and that eventually the economy should be on a new and
stronger upward path. For us to take the position at this point that
there is cumulative weakness in the economy of a nature which might
require our next move to be down rather than up would require that we
essentially alter our view. Now, obviously, if events occur that make
that required, we will have no alternative. But there is little or no
evidence to suggest that the underlying basis as to what is causing
the system to function requires a change in policy at this point.
I
think we had a significant indication yesterday with those auto and
If this economy were undergoing a process
light truck sales figures.
of contraction, it's very difficult to imagine where those numbers
were coming from.
Nonetheless, we do have a very odd combination of effects
here in that the fiscal package is creating a lot of uncertainties so
far as the forecast is concerned. If we look at the extent of that
fiscal restraint in the context that the Greenbook did, by any measure
it is a relatively modest degree of restraint and one cannot readily
argue that there's much in the way of ex post receipts and
expenditures that is significantly altering the economic environment.
What is quite interesting, and I think apparent, as one looks at this
process as it develops is that the psychological or anticipatory
aspects involved in this fiscal package really are of an order of
magnitude that seems to be almost larger than the actual impact. I'm
not saying that's true; I'm not saying that is an incredible
perception. I don't know how much of the long-term interest rate
reduction is attributable to the expectation that there will be a
credible reduction in the deficit somewhere out there. I suspect most
of it is, rightly or wrongly.
[Lower interest rates] have
unquestionably been a major factor in the improvement of balance
sheets and increasing consumer incomes as a consequence of the
reduction in the fairly substantial debt service burdens.
It's rather
obvious at this point, however, that the offsetting impact on the
negative side--on the contraction in the real variables--is on the tax
side and, at least based on the anecdotal discussions around this
table yesterday, on the capital goods markets with respect to a number
of projects being put on hold. It's very tough to see that in the
data as yet. The only place it actually materializes is in the
nondefense durable goods numbers.
Surely, it doesn't get picked up in
any of the broader measures or in any of the actual measures of
capital expenditures concurrently.
So, if there's anything out there,
two or three months; but at the moment it's
statistics which demonstrate that.
I think
a slowdown in the rate of growth in medical

we'll learn about it in
hard to find any hard
we're getting something of
employment, which I

7/6-7/93

-67-

suspect may be a reflection of the expectation that something is
happening on the fiscal side relating to medical care and the like.
So, what we are looking at is an economy which arguably is being
affected both positively and negatively by the deficit issue well in
advance of any actual changes in either receipts or expenditures. And
I don't think we have very much in the way of history to know how to
play this.
If this economy is going to start to weaken far more than
we expect, it's not credible that it will occur as a consequence of
the actual hard numbers that are out there in the budget proposal, all
of which are out sufficiently in [the future].
One can't really say
that in econometric terms we've had any real response. But to the
extent that anticipations [are having an effect]--for example, to the
extent that the [proposed] individual income tax rates are having an
impact on the behavior of small business and subchapter S
corporations, which almost surely is happening--it is a negative
effect. So, it's hard to measure how this is moving.
I would conclude, unless and until we have some very hard
evidence that the psychological impact of the budget package is of
such an order of magnitude to upset the balance of this economy, that
we almost surely are best positioned to maintain [conditions
consistent with] our general view [of the outlook], which is largely
reflected in the Greenbook. It's reflected in the views of pretty
much everyone around the table. The outside economists hold about the
same [view]; their number for growth is 3 percent, plus or minus. The
range [of forecasts] is incredibly narrow in the private sector, which
proves absolutely nothing except that they all feel warm from being
close to each other.
It doesn't have anything to do with the accuracy
of their forecasts.
So, I do think that we're all looking at the same process.
And unless and until we see clear evidence that things are not
materializing in that way, I can't see any basic purpose for us to
change [our policy stance].
In looking at the data, I suppose one can
argue in principle for symmetry or for just staying where we were the
last time. My own preference is to stay with asymmetry but with [the
understanding that] a Committee discussion would be indicated in the
event that anything emerges that requires a change. We have
maintained this particular monetary stance for so long, and I think
very successfully, that I don't think we should move until the
Committee has a chance to evaluate and discuss the incoming data that
could make a move necessary. As I look at the data [scheduled] to
come out before the next meeting, we will have two sets of price data
and two [months] of retail sales. And I think we're going to get a
fairly clean view, hopefully, of the way this system is emerging. And
while I would like to stay asymmetric, I don't think it's appropriate
in this type of environment to move at the discretion of the Desk
without fairly extensive further discussions on the part of the
Committee. So, my inclination at this stage is to stay pretty much
where we were and leave it at that, although I can't say that I can
argue strenuously against symmetry because obviously in this context
that is also a credible position. So, that's what I've got to say.
And President Syron is [next] on the ticket.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I would strongly support what you
want to do. I had questions the last time as to whether we should
have gone to asymmetry, given that we weren't there.
I think actually
it worked out pretty well.

7/6-7/93

-68-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think in retrospect it was the right

move.
MR. SYRON. In retrospect it was. But now that we're there,
I think we want to continue to give the signal that we'd react
relatively quickly--I'm trying to recall Norm's exact phrasing--were
we to get [clear signs of an emergence of higher inflation].
And I
have some concern about the market reaction we might get were we to
switch back [to symmetry].
I also have some concern about what a
switch back might signal in terms of people saying:
Well, does the
Fed really see the economy being much softer than they saw it earlier?
Also, I think your suggestion was particularly appropriate that, given
how long it has been since we have made a change, there should be some
Committee discussion. That would be in my view the optimal approach
to take.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. I strongly support your position also, Mr.
Chairman. We all deplore the leak at the time of the last meeting,
but the fact of the matter is that I think the markets and the public
reacted very favorably to the news that we had moved to asymmetry last
time. I think Dick is right; if now or later on they learned that at
this meeting we switched back to symmetric language in the face of
only one month's disappointing data--not all of which incidentally is
disappointing, as you pointed out--I think that would do us some
damage. So, I support your position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, when I read those
forecasts in the Wall Street Journal yesterday I became very concerned
because everybody seemed to be warm and cuddly together!
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You know, they really were remarkably

close.
MR. FORRESTAL. They are clustered. Well, I would certainly
support your prescription with respect to no change in policy. I
think everything that's going on in the real economy, the uncertainty,
and the fact that we've lowered our GDP forecasts a little, all argue
very strongly for a stable monetary policy, particularly in view of
So, I
the fact that the inflation numbers have improved somewhat.
think no change in policy is clearly the right prescription. I have a
preference for symmetry, if only on a theoretical basis, in the sense
that it seems probable to me that we will not move in either
direction, and that in my mind calls for a symmetric directive.
However, having just had an asymmetric directive, I can understand
that there may be some problems in moving to symmetry. So, I would
certainly not object to asymmetry, particularly in view of your
statement that it wouldn't presuppose any policy action.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would support your
recommendation. I think a case could be made for symmetry but, given
where we are today and also given my own utility function with regard
to inflation, I would just as soon [retain] the asymmetry.

7/6-7/93

-69-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I think the case for a steady policy is a strong
one, and you've laid it out.
On the issue of symmetry or asymmetry,
if one looked just to the decision today without regard to what
happened in the current [intermeeting] period, I think one could make
an intellectual case for symmetry. But having moved to asymmetry, I
think the balance of the evidence says we ought to stay where we are
with the asymmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. While I might have had a slight preference for
symmetry, I very much support your recommendation primarily for the
reason Al Broaddus mentioned. If there were another leak reflecting a
change from asymmetry to symmetry this time, it would be very awkward
in the marketplace. And, therefore, I think what you recommend is
appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Governor LaWare.

I support your proposal.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS.
I also support it.
I was swayed last time by
the argument that we needed to be on record as being concerned about
inflation. It seems to me that we have less reason to ease or tighten
now. I do think that at some point we're going to have to address
negative real rates. But it doesn't appear to me that at this time
they are causing particular harm to the economy. And it seems to me
that we're best staying the course and best staying with an asymmetric
toward tightening directive. I think a change would signal a lack of
concern about inflation, and that would not be a good thing to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. I would support no change at this time.
I would
have a slight preference for symmetry; but having heard the arguments
for having already made one change, changing back may be awkward now.
But on the merits of it, I think symmetry would be appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. I support your recommendation including the
asymmetry for the reasons that everybody else has given. However, I
do think there are some serious downside risks that we have to be
alert to.
I was struck by Bob Parry's recounting yesterday of the
state budget problems that are leading to conservative fiscal actions
and pushing those problems down to the local governments. At the
national level we're about to have a huge tax increase. State and
local governments all over the country are [also raising taxes] and
are cutting back spending. Businesses are able to shrink their way to
prosperity, but I think the country may be engaged in a fallacy of
composition--and Keynes must be spinning in his grave right now-because we're all trying to save and tax our way to prosperity. So,
that is a concern. I support your recommendation.

7/6-7/93

-70-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I fully support your
recommendation. I think the interesting debate that we're going to
have is how to respond to a supply shock; we're not going to have that
debate today. But if, unfortunately, the supply shock continues, the
fair question would be:
Can you cure an adverse supply shock with
easy money? And I look forward to the intellectual discourse that
solving that problem will produce.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

President Stern.

I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Alan, I support what you say.
I think I heard
implicitly in [your comments] that we really need to be watching
things pretty carefully here and that we need to be prepared to move
promptly. I suspect that market participants and probably a lot of
people in this room breathed a big sigh of relief when we got the PPI
and CPI numbers; and in my view that's probably not justified. As I
see things, we've had a very stimulative policy in train for some
period of time--when you look at the narrower aggregates or when you
look at the level of short-term rates--and we're going to have to get
that rope back in at some point in time. And it's not going to be any
In fact, it will probably get
easier down the road, as I view it.
tougher. Your analysis of the budget may well be exactly right.
The
facts may be worse than the expectations but politically my guess is-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The other way around.

MR. MELZER. Yes, that would be the other way around--once
they enacted something. In terms of market expectations, once it
becomes absolutely clear that we must move and we're looking at a
structure of rates that anticipates the Fed is going to move x basis
points within the next month or two months or whatever, it just
becomes harder and harder to catch up.
In other words, we've been
fortunate in a way that we've had a few signals here, a few warning
shots, and we haven't been compelled to move. But eventually the time
will come when it's no longer a warning shot and we will be trying to
chase a train that already left the station. Other people have said
that over time at these meetings. I think what you've suggested for
this meeting is quite appropriate. But I just hope we will be
attentive in the direction that I'm expressing here as we move
forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, we're talking about a very narrow
range of differences here and, regardless of whether one's personal
preference is asymmetry or symmetry, the overriding point right now
with this narrow range of differences is that we not change. And as a
consequence, I will support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Oltman.

-71-

7/6-7/93

MR. OLTMAN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
Perhaps if we were starting from scratch, I would have some preference
for symmetry but I don't think we ought to change [from asymmetry].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

MR. MULLINS.
I support your proposal, Mr. Chairman, and I
also agree with Tom Melzer's arguments as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm clearly not in tune with the other
members of the FOMC. I don't see any need to wait for any
information. The markets provide indications every day as to whether
or not we've provided more liquidity than is called for. And when we
lowered the fed funds rate from 4 percent to 3 percent, my guess is
that made very, very little difference in the rate of real GDP growth.
The destabilizing factors that have led people to hold, shift, or use
their balances as much as they have was, I think, a drag against the
stimulus that was already in place. A 4 percent fed funds rate
already was providing a lot of stimulus. We already had pegged the
fed funds rate well below the natural rate of interest. We now have
evidence, and we see it in our own staff's forecast, that the expected
rate of inflation has moved up 0.6 or 0.7 percent just [since the May
FOMC] meeting. Now, in that environment, policy is not stable. We do
not have the same policy that we had at the last meeting because the
real rate of interest by our best estimate has fallen to even more
sharply negative territory. We clearly see in the price of gold that
people are making bets out there. And we continue to lock in to a fed
funds rate that will only aggravate that kind of speculation and it
only detracts from the role of the U.S. currency as the stable
currency for the world. The cost to the world of the United States
pursuing inflationary policies in the late 1960s and the 1970s is
unbelievable. We're still paying the cost because many other central
banks with no confidence in us think they have to be Rambo-like in
beating their chests because in some sense they've got a track for the
inflation-induced environment that the Federal Reserve as the world's
reserve currency provides. This is the time for us to move real
interest rates back at least to zero. I would be satisfied to do a
measly 1/4 percentage point, which would not get us back to zero, but
there would be intervention value in that. There wouldn't be any harm
in it.
Is there anyone who really believes the U.S. economy,
regardless of what is done on the fiscal [side], is going to suffer
because the funds rate goes up from 3 to 3-1/4 percent? Now, I read
Henry Kauffman, as many of you must have, and it's just absurd. Well,
I must be the one that's absurd! Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I also am not happy about the fact that
inflation this year is not going to come in where we talked about last
February, and the judgment has to be that our policies are not at the
moment moving us in the direction of our long-term objective. We
ought to correct that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
asymmetric.

The general consensus appears to be "B,"

7/6-7/93

-72-

MR. BERNARD.
[The directive would read:]
"In the
implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with modest growth in the
broader monetary aggregates over the third quarter."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Acting Vice Chairman Mullins
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
First Vice President Oltman
Governor Phillips
President Stern

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Norm wants me to remind you that any
changes in your forecasts should be submitted to Mike by midday
Friday, July 9. Also, of course, the next meeting is August 17th.
Now, why don't we just take a short recess and then come back.
MR. KELLEY.

Let's just press on.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.
to finish before lunch!
[Laughter]
MR. BERNARD.

Well, unfortunately, we're going

Someone is going to get Don Winn.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The subject matter, as you know, is how
this Committee wants to handle the problem of stories or leaks and the
like. I've asked Don Winn to join us.
We got an extended letter from
Henry B. Gonzalez on this leak question; I got it late yesterday. I
I was planning to raise these
think it would be useful to read it.
questions, as I indicated yesterday, before we got this letter; and
clearly we have problems we're dealing with up [on the Hill], so it's
useful to read this.
MR. SYRON.
this year?

Are we into triple digits in counting his letters

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's close!
I think the productivity of
Mr. Auerbach is extraordinary. He must have been Fed trained! Don,
would you circulate those letters. Why don't we all just take a
minute or two to read this and then we can have a substantive
discussion.

7/6-7/93

-73-

This actually is the most thoughtful letter I've ever
received from Mr. Gonzalez.
It is a very credible letter and strikes
me as very much to the point. He's not pounding on the table; he's
making a very serious point. The basic notion is that leaks and
public statements about FOMC meetings are a very serious matter that
calls into question the credibility of the Federal Reserve to manage
its own operations. That's an argument that is very difficult to get
at. The issue about leaks is really part of a much broader problem,
and I think we've got to give it some thought. Clearly, with the
demise of fiscal policy there has been an extraordinary point of focus
on the fact that this organization is a powerful element within the
government and, indeed, considering some of the other aspects of the
way policy is implemented, I don't think there is any question about
that. Secondly, in large part as a result of the extraordinary
elevation of the press as a consequence of the Watergate episode,
we've created a very large increase in investigative reporting
capacity. There is a much larger number of very competent,
economically educated press people working in the world of finance
than at any time in my memory. When I was at the CEA--that was only
1975-76--there was nothing like the technical capability that a lot of
these reporters have. You could just feed them pabulum and they
pretty much accepted it.
That clearly has changed quite dramatically.
Now, I thought about it yesterday when I was sitting here
listening to the economic discussion, and listening to each one of you
talk about the way the economy is functioning through economic
activity, inflation, the outlook, and all in words that most of you
will use in public. And I sat there and wrote down what the monetary
policy [stance of] each individual in this group was. Let me tell
you:
If I can do it, so can they. The presumption that you can go
out there and talk about the economy without conveying something
[about your own policy views] strikes me as really off the mark. I
personally do not think that the Wall Street Journal leak came out of
this room.
[David Wessel] almost invariably will say that this
information came from Fed officials, senior Fed officials,
Administration officials, or government officials. I don't know if
you remember his article but he said "people familiar with how the
Federal Reserve functions," which to me is a code word for about half
the people out there and was probably meant to mean somebody who used
to work here and knows how the System works, of which there are
legion. Had he direct information, I suspect he would have said so.
But the point is that he didn't need direct information. One can
infer quite reasonably what the policy outcome of the last meeting was
if one just sits by the telerate screen and reads what each one of us
is saying. Now, I'm not saying that's either good or bad. Indeed,
part of our job is to communicate to our various constituents. But it
would be naive in the extreme to believe that we can do that the way
we do it without communicating very significantly to the outside as to
what this organization is essentially all about.
We all have to remember that the press is interested in us
because we all have access to FOMC deliberations. The general
presumption of any intelligent reporter is that whatever we say will
reflect that. The probability that we are not conditioned by what is
going on here is zero. In fact, even if it is not zero, that is the
general presumption. We have an extraordinary amount of information
in this group; we talk to each other. There is a sense in which there
is an information system which exists in the Federal Open Market

7/6-7/93

-74-

Committee; there is a combined knowledge of what everybody thinks and
what, therefore, policy is going to be. There is a property right
that the Committee has, and those of us who work off the data system
and talk in great generalities about what is going on are on the edge
of infringing that property right. It is a right which essentially
belongs to all of us collectively. I think we all ought to remember
that if we were private citizens, the phone would not be ringing off
the hook. We are called to talk to the press because we are members
of this organization. We get invitations to speak all over the place
because we are members of this organization. And it's terribly
important for us to remember that we cannot talk with impunity.
Indeed, what constitutes the leaks that occur on occasion, in my
judgment, are not the result of purposeful actions on the part of any
member in this room. I think what happens is that in conversations
with people on the outside, we forget that there's an IQ on the other
side of that phone. And I will tell you that if I were a reporter and
got into a long conversation with any member of this organization and
if that person was at all open or honest in any way, I would bet with
a high degree of probability that I could forecast not only your
position but also a lot about what other people in this room thought
because one tends to [convey] that.
It's not something people are
aware of sometimes, but I've observed it time and time again, and I've
been around this town for a very long period of time.
It's really an
issue that this Committee has to confront [and decide] what it is we
want to do.
We can acquiesce in this type of request, which
essentially means we issue something [like a statement]; as Don Kohn
has indicated to me, he doesn't seriously believe that will alter the
configuration very much. Rather than my repeating Don's words why
don't I just turn the floor over to him so he can tell you what he has
told me about this question and get it on the table.
MR. BOEHNE. Before you do, may I ask a question? I think
that your analysis of the Wall Street Journal article is conceivable
and believable.
But when I read on the screen and when CNBC says that
we had a unanimous vote and then an hour and a half later it says no
it was not unanimous but 10 to 2, I'd say they need to have more than
IQ to get that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The CNBC thing was a pure, unadulterated
leak. It was not inferable except with a probability outside the
significant limits that anyone of us would use in our statistical
analyses. That was as pure a leak as you can get. The reason I say
that is that they had the correct vote. The probability of that
happening by chance approaches zero.
MR. BOEHNE.

Right.

MR. SYRON. And they got it shortly after they had [announced
something that was] an error; clearly, someone called them or they
talked to someone in that interim period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is correct. I must say to
I have a suspicion that I know how that all occurred; that is
great secret to me. All I'm saying is that the initial issue
emerges here is the Wessel article, and my best guess is that
picked up the asymmetry without a leak.

you that
not a
that
Wessel

7/6-7/93

-75-

MR. SYRON. Can I pursue this? Your guess is that he wrote
the article based on [his analysis of various comments].
You're
right, I think, that if you look at what people have said in
testimonies and a number of situations, [a reporter] can put it
together. But did he then in your scenario, if I can call it that,
call around to people to get what he thought was confirmation of it?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, and I think he failed to get it.

MR. SYRON.
So, you think he wrote the article before the
meeting and he could have written a similar article before this
meeting, unconfirmed by information post-meeting in time?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now, let me tell you that my sole
evidence rests with my knowledge of how the Wall Street Journal
reporters write about their sources, which is not accidental.
It
comes as official policy. He would never have used the choice of
words he used had he either Federal Reserve or Administration sources.
MR. SYRON. I don't remember the exact words, but I thought
he effectively eliminated Federal Reserve sources but did not
eliminate Administration sources.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, he said sources familiar with the
way the Federal Reserve works.
MR. KOHN.

It's on page 2 of Mr. Gonzalez's letter.

MR. LINDSEY.
different.

"Familiar with the Fed's deliberations,"

that's

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a phraseology that he does not
use if he has actual sources. As I read in the paper, some Wall
Street wag--I've forgotten what firm he's with--said:
"Well, this
could easily be me. I'm familiar with the deliberations of the Fed."
MR. BOEHNE. Are you saying that you believe somebody like
David Wessel can write that article and not talk to anybody in this
room after the FOMC meeting or a week before?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think he talked to a lot of people who
formerly worked here:
former governors, former staff people, and the
like. Look, I'm telling you, my sole evidence is my knowledge of how
they designate their sources.
MR. BOEHNE. I have a feeling that if everybody in this room
followed the basic rule of not talking to a reporter one week before
or after an FOMC meeting--or in the case of the Humphrey-Hawkins
meetings until after the testimony--we'd make it pretty tough on
people like David Wessel to write a story like that. And I know we
wouldn't have a CNBC problem.
MR. SYRON. And if you expanded that to what I thought our
rule was--that we not only don't talk to anyone but that we give no
speeches--.
I thought we were to say we weren't available for any
comments X days before or X days after; I thought it was 10 days
before or 10 days after.

7/6-7/93

-76-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, we do have a listing of the
types of things which over the years have provided guidance. Let me
read it to you; I'd be curious to get reactions on it.
This is titled
"Guidelines for Public Speeches and Talks with Journalists and Others
about Monetary Policy and the Economy."
Under the "Do Not Discuss"
section are:
(1) Future movements in interest and exchange rates.
(2) Recent decisions or discussions at FOMC meetings; the
minutes speak for themselves. The prohibition includes
comments on what positions people took at the meeting.
(3) Anything about the economy or policy one week before or
one week after an FOMC meeting. The blackout period in
February and July extends to the day of the Humphrey-Hawkins
testimony.
(4) The detailed outlook for the economy, which can be
construed as [having] implications for near-term policy.
(5) The performance of other government officials.
Under "Issues Available for Discussion" are:
(1) Broad trends in the economy, provided the discussion is
sufficiently vague and balanced to make drawing implications
for future policy impossible.
(2) Broad policy objectives and the mechanism and techniques
of implementing policy.
(3) Any matters on the public record, such as recent
testimony.
(4) Economic conditions in your region.
(5) Background economic research already publicly released.
Needless to say, in the areas of bank regulation, community
development, and a whole variety of other things which are in the
Federal Reserve's bailiwick, discussions are perfectly appropriate and
desirable and in that respect there's an awful lot to talk about.
Does anyone have any basic objections to this set of guidelines?
MR. MULLINS.

I think it should be distributed.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
is that it may leak!
MR. MULLINS.

The only problem I have distributing it

You don't think they are a good set?

MR. ANGELL. Well, I guess I had only one question on the
next to the last one. Would you read that again about the outlook?
MR. MULLINS.

The detailed outlook for the economy?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The detailed outlook for the economy,
which can be construed as [having] implications for near-term policy.
Let me just say that it is a very tricky issue; I think we all are
aware of where the line is.
It may well be that the safest thing we
can do at this particular stage is for none of us even to answer a
press request or go off the record until after the Humphrey-Hawkins
testimony because we're opening ourselves up to trouble. And what do
we need it for?
In other words, why do we have to do it?

-77-

7/6-7/93

MR. ANGELL. I strongly believe that in a democracy public
officials have a responsibility. And one responsibility we don't have
is to engage in chicanery with the press and to give any background or
off-the-record information. If everyone who talked to [a reporter]
said "I only talked to you because you're using my name," then that
embarrassment will discipline each person. I do not believe that
anyone from this organization should ever talk to any reporter on
background or off the record. That's what constitutes the problem.
In a democracy public officials do have a responsibility to
communicate. There is an educational program. The Federal Reserve if
it is to be successful in regard to accomplishing our primary
objectives must be able to say clearly what our objectives are. And
[education] becomes a very, very important part of that. And for us
to react by saying no speeches, I'd say no.
I agree with the no
speeches 7 days before and 7 days after [an FOMC meeting].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's the important period.

MR. ANGELL. That's the important period. But if anyone
talks to any reporter, I think we should keep a log of who we talk to
and make that log available to each other. That is, any time we talk
we ought to make a log. We'd say I talked to so-and-so on this day
and put it down. And we ought to share it with each other. Now, I
don't understand this CNBC thing. It seems to me you're dismissing
that a little too lightly, if someone from this organization
absolutely told someone what they had no business telling them in
regard to that vote. No one had the right to correct the mistaken
vote that CNBC reported. No one had the right to do that.
No one has
the right ever to say what they think my view is; I am the only one
who has the right to say what my view is.
I don't have the right to
I
say what David Mullins' view is or what anybody else's view is.
don't have the right to say what the Board might do; I don't have the
right to say what the FOMC might do.
I want a different distinction
than is being made.
I think the obligation in a democracy is very,
very strong. And I [don't] think the best thing for us to do is not
to talk and never to give our views.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't think that's what this says.

MR. LAWARE. The only reason we have to have this elaborate
list of do's and don'ts is because we insist on preserving this six
weeks of secrecy with regard to what goes on in this room. If we made
a prompt announcement of what went on in this room, we wouldn't have
to concern ourselves with this; and we might throw a few undeserving
reporters out of work. I'm surprised that you feel that this is a
thoughtful letter [from Chairman Gonzalez].
This is part of the same
attack on this institution that has been coming from Henry B. Gonzalez
for some time. Just listen to the way this reads:
"I believe that
most objective observers would agree that the above examples indicate
the Federal Reserve on occasion disseminates information"--that sounds
like deliberate disseminations--"through leaks and random public
statements by Federal Reserve officials."
He seems to regard this as
an accepted practice of this institution!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I accept your amendment.
mean to imply that the letter was without--

I didn't

7/6-7/93

-78-

MR. ANGELL. But unfortunately there are some instances in
which that is the case.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I was going to ask Don for a few remarks
relative to this question because I think we have to make a statement.
Do we want to issue something? I think, substantively, it's bound to
inhibit somewhat this organization's function. Don.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, I perhaps just ought to remind the
Committee very briefly that on several occasions over the last six or
eight months it did consider this question of whether it should
release information immediately. We had a Mullins' subcommittee on
this and a full and open discussion on the issue. While a few members
of the Committee tended to favor immediate release, they were, I
think, a minority; certainly, no one moved to change the situation.
The concerns of the Committee at the time were the questions of
flexibility in policymaking, whether an immediate announcement of a
directive, say, like the asymmetric directive in May, would constrain
the Committee from going to asymmetry because they wouldn't want the
announcement effect.
In fact, the effect was that it did have markets
raising interest rates; if they weren't sure, they were going to raise
rates. By constraining [the ability of] the Committee to take actions
to go to an asymmetric directive or off asymmetry to symmetry, it
would in some sense remove by very small amounts some of the
flexibility of the Committee. That was the concern the Committee had.
The other issue that you need to think about if you're
considering going to an immediate release is what to release. If in
May, for example, right after its meeting the Committee had released
the fact that it had gone to an asymmetric directive would that have
significantly called off the reporters? One has to wonder. At least
I would have to wonder whether the reporters wouldn't be all over the
Committee members wondering why you had done it and under what
circumstances a change would be made.
[But] it would help [to release
such information] and in most meetings it would stop right there, I
think, once the Committee announced its decision. But then you do
have the question of what you release along with that and how far to
go.
So, there are a couple of issues that were raised when the
Committee last discussed this.
MR. LAWARE.
I didn't intend to make a brief for immediate
release. In any case, even if I believed that was the right way to
go--and I'm not sure I do--I wouldn't do it in light of this because
this Congressman would declare victory and say "Now I've got them."
I
wouldn't sit still for that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must humbly retract my statement with
respect to the quality of the letter because I'm more inclined in your
direction than not.
To be exact, there are a few sentences in it that
I think are reasonable.
MR. KELLEY.
I think what you said, Mr. Chairman, was that
the letter is the best you have seen of those he has sent to us.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think Governor LaWare more
appropriately characterized it.

7/6-7/93

-79-

MR. PARRY. I have two questions. This prohibition of 7 days
before and 7 days after a meeting is something that Joe Coyne has
repeated quite often in the 7 years I've been here. But there are a
number of people who obviously disregard this completely. Very often
when I get back the next day I'll see three or four people have given
a speech the day after [the FOMC meeting].
I assume they think for
some reason that that [prohibition] is a mistake.
If that's the case,
I'd like to hear what their objections are. It may be legitimate that
we shouldn't have it. I frankly think it has been a wise thing, but
there obviously are some people who feel as though we should not have
such a prohibition because they violate it all the time. So, if they
violate it all the time, I assume they would not be unhappy talking
about why.
MR. ANGELL. Bob, I'm not as concerned about the people who
violate it with their names as I am about those who violate it without
their names.
MR. PARRY. I'm not talking about talking to the press. I'm
saying that speeches are scheduled; they get on the wires, etc. Yet,
I thought there was a consensus that we would not give speeches
dealing with the economy 7 days before and 7 days after [an FOMC
meeting].
Obviously, some people don't know that or, knowing it,
don't think it should be respected. It would be interesting to know
what it is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody have a speech scheduled
between now and Humphrey-Hawkins?
MR. PARRY.
case.

Well, I can go back and look at--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm not denying the truth in this
You're talking historically; I'm talking from here on.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

If none of us answers
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I will say this:
a press call, then the only way anything can leak is if we tell
somebody else who then tells the press.
MR. ANGELL. Well, telling someone else is every bit as bad,
if not worse than telling the press.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Of course.

MR. LAWARE.

Sure.

MR. ANGELL.

Telling somebody else is even more suspicious.

MR. PARRY. I had a second question. I'm not sure I fully
understand the point made about talking about the economy in such a
way that has policy implications.
If one has concerns about
inflation, for example, are you saying that that view should never be
articulated in public?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm saying, for example, if you get
out in public and say that inflation is a very serious problem and we
have to do something quickly, that is a statement of where our

7/6-7/93

-80-

position is on monetary policy. If you say it's the role of a central
bank to maintain stable prices, that's a philosophical judgment with
respect to the nature of our institution, which hopefully we all
subscribe to. The broad principles are something we should enunciate
whenever we can.
MR. ANGELL. You're [able to] read [people's views on policy]
better than I. I hear people saying that inflation is a problem and I
don't know how they're going to vote after I've seen them make a
statement about inflation being a problem. There have been four or
five people who have made statements about inflation being a problem
and, frankly, I don't know how they're going to vote based upon what
they say. I don't understand how you think the reporters know how
they're going to vote.
MR. LAWARE.
MR. SYRON.

We don't make that mistake about you, though!
Consistency.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember what the problem is; we are all
on the record six weeks after the fact. So, it's a question, really,
of how one characterizes things. My main concern, frankly, is less
about what we each are saying about our own views but what we are
inadvertently conveying about the nature of the position of the
Committee overall.
There are times, and I can cite innumerable
instances, where sentences of members who are sitting around this
table have slipped out in Q&As and the like--[sentences that] have
characterized [the view of] this organization as a whole. And I think
that is something we have to be very careful about.
MR. FORRESTAL. This business about talking to other people
raises a question in my mind that I've had for quite a long time.
The
question is whether or not the Administration might be leaking some of
this information. Is there any kind of arrangement we have in which
we talk to the Administration?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. Up until about
two years ago, I would say, it was the conventional thing for the
Chairman of the Fed to convey to the chairman of the CEA what our
policy was; it was part of the discussion. But it became apparent to
me that that was a hole as large as one can imagine.
I have not
talked to either the Bush Administration or the Clinton Administration
on any policy matters initiated in this Committee room. And I must
say that one does not see Administration officials-MR. ANGELL.

As much as one used to.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's right.

MR. FORRESTAL. That has been beneficial in one sense, but it
makes the problem even more acute because we have two issues here.
One is: Are these leaks deliberate? The CNBC report certainly
pointed to a deliberate leak. First, to go back to John LaWare's
remark about the letter, I agree that it's an attack; but that doesn't
I
in any way diminish the seriousness of what he is pointing to.
think the credibility of this institution is really on the line with
deliberate leaks. And if we know that there are deliberate leaks, I
think we have an obligation to track them down and do something about

7/6-7/93

-81-

them. The inadvertent leaks through talking to reporters I think can
be corrected to a very large extent by following those guidelines.
And I think we all have to follow them very religiously and keep them
in mind. The third point I'd make is that if David Wessel did get
this information from sources outside the Fed, there's really nothing
we can do about that, it seems to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Frankly, I didn't particularly mind the
David Wessel piece if in fact what he was picking up was a guess or a
judgment of how this organization might function.
MR. FORRESTAL.

Yes, he's guessing and talking to other

people.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And the reason it appears [that way] is
that he didn't do something which is usually done, namely, quote a lot
of people. It is conceivable that I am not characterizing this
situation correctly. As I said before, my sole piece of evidence is
my historic knowledge of the policy of the Wall Street Journal with
respect to designating sources.
MR. FORRESTAL.

Yes, I think that's a logical conclusion.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And if that is true, then I'd say-Well, before Wessel we had a long period where we were quite secure.
MR. SYRON. But the difficulty is that it comes back to what
John LaWare said about disclosure. This Committee did have a
discussion about that.
But at the time of that discussion I think we
had a somewhat better recent history on leaks. Regardless of how one
interprets the Wessel situation, the CNBC matter was clearly a leak of
some sort or another. On the face of it, unless we can demonstrate in
a relatively short period of time that this leak problem can be
eliminated, over the course of time we will have no choice but to go
to disclosure. It's that simple. We have not demonstrated as an
organization a capacity to [prevent leaks] and [as a result] we're
destroying the credibility of this organization and all the things
that we're trying to do in terms of our objectives. So, unless we can
really get to that point very, very quickly, then we better start
thinking very seriously about what we want to release.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

I couldn't agree with you more.

I think that's correct.

MR. KEEHN. I think that's exactly right, but I just question
whether we have the time to make it happen.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, we have two possibilities coming
from right here. We can decide now that we want to change our
disclosure [practices]; we could ask the Mullins subcommittee to
review the previous [material on this] and come back with a
recommendation. Or we can say that we don't wish to change; we think
that the procedures we're using are most appropriate for the effective
workings of this organization. Then, in the event there is a leak, we
will request the General Counsel to ask for sworn statements
voluntarily of all individuals in this room that they did not
communicate with a particular press person.
It gets down to the point

7/6-7/93

-82-

where we would ask for voluntary sworn statements.
work, then I'd say we have no choice but to-MR. SYRON.
do the latter, too.
MR. KEEHN.

If that doesn't

Because of the time constraints, I'd prefer you
Why would the statements be voluntary?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because there is no legal means by which
one can enforce a sworn statement of members of the Board of
Governors.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I think you ought to find a way of getting
[rid of] anybody not willing to give a statement.
MR. ANGELL.

How would you suggest doing it?

MR. KEEHN. I think if the Chairman of the Board puts the
freeze on anybody at this table, he's gone.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. KEEHN.
are in effect gone.

Wait a minute.

What are you talking about?

If the Chairman puts the freeze on somebody, they

MR. ANGELL. Members of the Board of Governors are not
appointed by the Chairman. Did you have the impression that we were?
MR. KEEHN.

I understand that.

MR. ANGELL. Now, there's no question that we have a pact
that we should enter into, one with another. As the Chairman says,
there is information that doesn't belong to each of us [as
It
individuals.]
But I certainly can't understand your comment, Si.
just blows my mind that one of seven-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
understandable frustration.

Well, why don't you just chalk it up to

MR. JORDAN. Part of what I was thinking Bob Forrestal
already referred to. When I read the Wessel piece I thought of the
If he
Administration. I think you're being generous to Wessel's IQ.
had said people familiar with the way the Fed deliberates, I would
have come to the conclusion you did. But he said "familiar with the
Fed's deliberations" in both of these articles.
I interpret that to
mean somebody who claimed to be in a position of knowing what happened
at that meeting [unintelligible]-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He's done it so often before and never
used that phrase.
It's much more credible to say:
"A Fed official
said that..."
MR. JORDAN. Yes, but if it's not a Fed official--if it's an
Administration official-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it to you this way. I have
been extraordinarily scrupulous in not indicating to the Secretary of
the Treasury, the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors, or

7/6-7/93

-83-

anybody, what it is we did in that meeting. I never even acknowledged
after the leaks were out that they were true.
MR. JORDAN. Well, whether it was a Fed official or not, I
associate myself with Wayne's point about "for the record for
background."
Having worked in this town in '81 and '82, I took the
position then that one just does not do off-the-record statements.
You either do it on the record or you don't say it.
But the trouble
with this town is that not many people agree with me. And people in
the Washington press know that, and people who work-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I don't agree with that. I
think the issue is not whether it's on the record or off the record or
what it is you say because there are occasions when you want to convey
[some] information without your name being known but [unintelligible]
of this organization and to disabuse certain people of certain views
without ending up with a confrontation or quarrel. So, I don't agree
with that. Wayne knows that I disagree with him on that.
MR. ANGELL.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But where I don't disagree with him is
on the content of what it is he's saying.
MR. MCTEER. As a practical matter, isn't the main argument
against immediate release of the directive the problem of asymmetric
directives?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's the crucial thing.

MR. MCTEER. Why don't we just go ahead and stop having
asymmetric directives and start releasing the directive before we
leave the room with the understanding that we can have telephone
conferences at a moment's notice for intermeeting decisions?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because that is a much less efficient
means of working than the way we're working.
MR. MCTEER. It would eliminate all the problems about
speech-making and times before and after the meeting and all that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

I doubt that.

Well, at least after.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No. David, you had a committee that
concluded after looking at the possibilities-MR. MULLINS. Yes. And basically I'm one of the people who
believe that not releasing asymmetric directives measurably increases
I think it
our flexibility and efficiency in monetary policymaking.
has served us well. That argument falls if it's released. I think
one can't rebut the argument that we should accelerate the release.
So, we may have no choice but to formalize the process and accelerate
the release. Looking back on it, we've had a number of these episodes
interspersed with relatively long periods of success. I personally
would be a bit hesitant about making the move to early release of the
directive in the heat of one of these episodes because I do view that

7/6-7/93

-84-

move as irreversible; and it will forever alter the opportunities
available for the Committee. Again, I think [delayed release] has
served us relatively well but we may have no choice. And I would
agree that if we have another episode, it will be hard to rebut the
argument. But my preference is to redouble our efforts at maintaining
confidentiality with full knowledge that we're on the brink of losing
this flexibility. Our subcommittee, when we talked about it, thought
there was quite a bit of flexibility in the asymmetric directive. And
there is inefficiency of essentially having the Committee in meeting
continuously, which is pretty close to what we'd have if we required
everyone to get together. We thought it was worth it but I don't know
how much it's worth. It's certainly not worth losing our credibility
over; and as a practical matter our credibility degenerates with the
leaks. But our subcommittee, and I guess the Committee in its
discussion as well, generally supported that notion although there
were some people who disagreed. We have blackout periods of plus or
minus one week, but then on the directive we have a longer period.
Actually, it's that longer period in which I think we may have had
some problems as well.
So, another argument is to line up the
blackout with the release of the directive.
MR. MCTEER.
If we did release the directive immediately, it
would possibly ease the pressure on us to reveal or release the
conversations that take place.
MR. MULLINS.
wouldn't they?

I think people would want to know why, though,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, they will always want to know why.
I think we'd heighten the interest in that.
Does anyone else want to
[comment]?
MR. MELZER. Well, I worked with David on that subcommittee
and I was not in favor of immediate release either; but I must say
subsequent developments put it in a different light, and I wouldn't be
against taking another look.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me suggest the following:
That we
make this effectively our last stand and that if we fail, the first
thing is that I will request the General Counsel to ask for sworn
statements so that we will at least have that on the record. For
those who choose not to make such a statement, that's their
prerogative. But Governor Angell is right. Members of the Board of
Governors are appointed by the President of the United States with the
consent of the Senate and are independent agents for good or bad.
Some of that is both!
[Laughter]
MR. KEEHN. Not to split a hair on that, but I thought at one
point we had an opinion that this was confidential information and to
release it was in fact breaking the law.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's not a statute that I'm aware of;
it's the rules of the Committee.
MR. MATTINGLY.
MR. KEEHN.

It's part of the FOMC's Regulations.

And that's not a law?

7/6-7/93

-85-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's not a felony.

MR. MATTINGLY. Some of the information the FOMC has do
violate those statues, but the directive does not; it violates the
FOMC's rules.
MR. KEEHN. Okay. But if you violate a law, it seems to me
that's a different set of circumstances.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
promulgate laws.

We are not a legislative body that can

MR. MCTEER. Well, I like Governor Angell's objection.
[I'd
have it] cover the presidents, not just limit it to the governors.
MR. ANGELL. Well, [unintelligible] the statute is somewhat
different.
I don't think we want to have a huge difference in
practice, but the statute is quite different in that the dismissal of
a member of the Board of Governors falls under an impeachment clause.
It's very specified. But the presidents serve at the pleasure of the
Board of Governors. In practice, we certainly wouldn't want it to be
that way; we'd look pretty silly if we ever-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's a legal distinction which we

cannot--

MR. SYRON. What are those five-year terms anyway?
you're right; that's a separate issue.

I think

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I understand that's what the statute
says.
But as a practical matter we couldn't function as a Committee
with a different status for different members of the Committee because
it won't work. The most important thing I'd say at this particular
stage is that when you get a press call, irrespective of from whom,
until the end of the Humphrey-Hawkins hearings--on the 22nd of July I
believe--you have laryngitis or something. If you think you can pick
up the phone and tell somebody nothing, don't believe it.
Believe me,
it's a mirage; and all you have to do is miss once. I think we just
can't afford it. Jerry Corrigan, as you may recall, said at the
luncheon that we gave him on his farewell immediately following the
last meeting of the FOMC that the one thing that could do this
institution in is the leak question and the whole issue of the
credibility of our operations. And I must tell you that Jerry is
almost surely right on this. We have an organization that in my
judgment has been extraordinarily effective through a very difficult
period. The wisdom of this group has really been quite extraordinary.
My impression, looking back at the history of our deliberations in the
last two or three years, is that we look extraordinarily perceptive
and effective. But that can all be undercut by a perception that we
can't function in an effective manner with respect to this issue. So,
let me just say in closing:
Please be very careful. And if we can
maintain confidentiality and carry through, I think we will
effectively be able to secure the position of our deliberations and
the status of the organization.
MR. LAWARE.

What are you going to say to Henry?

7/6-7/93

-86-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
different question.
MR. LAWARE.

I haven't decided yet.

Well, that's a

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are not going to tell him we're doing
something. That's about as much as I can say. Unless anybody has
anything further to add to this very difficult problem, I would
suggest we adjourn for lunch.
MR. MELZER.

Alan, the guidelines you read--are we following

those?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My understanding is that we have not
been following the guidelines with respect to blackouts a week before,
a week after and up to the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony; we have not
been doing that.
MR. SYRON.
MR. MELZER.
MR. SYRON.

Are we agreeing that we are going to do that?
That's what I'm asking.
Should we do it?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume that the answer is yes. Unless
I hear an objection from the Committee, that's the rule of this
Committee.
MR. MCTEER. Does that apply to any speeches?
talking about the press?

Or are we

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
In other words, if you want to
talk about the history of the American economy or the history of the
old West--.
[Laughter]
But if you're going to talk about anything
with respect to the immediate future, I would say to you that's [not
appropriate].
MR. SYRON. It's important because we can't even talk about
our region. Or we shouldn't even talk about our regions because if we
do, it gets into-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say this:
One of the things that
we ought to talk about is our regions outside of the blackout area.
MR. SYRON.

Oh, yes, absolutely.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's important that each of the
presidents be viewed as the representative of an area and the chief
government spokesman on the economy in his region. One way to do that
is to get out there and talk about the characteristics of the region,
what it's all about, what it's doing, what makes it different from the
rest of the country, and why it's better. But if you start talking
about the short-term outlook for the region, you can't get around the
issue of talking about the overall economy.
MR. SYRON.

Exactly.

7/6-7/93

-87-

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm under the impression that the
fact that we have this one-week blackout on either side of FOMC
meetings is in the public realm now, that it is well known.
MR. SYRON.

It is?

MR. COYNE.

Yes.

MR. KELLEY. It's obviously not accepted by the press, but
they are aware of the fact that that policy does exist in the FOMC.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. COYNE.
[unintelligible].

Joe Coyne, is that a fact?

That's right;

they are aware.

They call it

MR. KELLEY. That being the case, there is no reason why we
should not simply decline openly to accept a question and answer time
wherein mistakes can so very easily be made. Just say no.
MR. MULLINS.

Just say no to questions on the--

MR. BROADDUS. One mechanical problem here just occurred to
me, and that is that a reporter can print something that he's gotten
from you much earlier and-MR. MULLINS.

They do that with me, too.

MR. BROADDUS. John Berry interviewed me about two weeks ago
and he hasn't printed anything yet, so he may-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
responsible [reporters].
MR. BROADDUS.

John Berry is one of the more

But that is a problem.

MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we need to discipline
ourselves with a little more reporting. That is, if anyone does have
a speech scheduled, we ought to notify the Chairman's office or some
office. We ought to go through a process of saying I have scheduled
[a speech].
The Committee ought to be notified when we're going to
speak in the blackout period.
MR. SYRON. In the blackout period, okay, but not for any
speech to be given outside the blackout period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just remember that there was an
organization called the Plumbers, and the last thing we need in the
Federal Reserve is a 1993 version of same. Look, we can carry this
thing too far. The basic purpose is solely to preserve the integrity
of these deliberations, not to inhibit people in any way from talking.
The [point] is that [talk] has been too loose. Anyone who has been
observing this phenomenon can tell. Okay, shall we adjourn for lunch?
END OF MEETING

