Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
August 17, 1993

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C.. on Tuesday. August 17, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
McTeer
Mullins
Phillips
Stern

Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard. Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis. Deputy General Counsel
Prell. Economist

Messrs. R. Davis, Promisel, Rosenblum, Scheld,
Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman. Associate
Economists
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations

Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics. Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton. Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant.
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr.

Messrs. Beebe. J. Davis. T. Davis, Dewald,
Goodfriend, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Cleveland, Kansas City, St. Louis,
Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. McNees, Meyer, and Miller, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Ms.

Meulendyke. Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
August 17, 1993
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. The first item,
which is not on the agenda, is to welcome our old/new colleague, the
new President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. I gather from
Norm Bernard--who is the world's greatest expert on all such issues-that Bill McDonough is not the first Manager to move up to the
presidency of the New York Bank; Allen Sproul who was Manager in 1938
to 1941 did the same. But you can't be first in everything, Bill! We
welcome you and are delighted to see you move up to this side of the
table where I can hear you better.
MR. MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
try to speak loudly and clearly.

I will continue to

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would be novel!
[Laughter]
The
first item on the agenda is approval of the minutes.
I would ask
somebody to make such a motion.
MR. KELLEY.

I'll move it, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I'd like to call on
Governor Mullins to move the election of the Vice Chairman, who will
hold office through the end of this year and until the next election
at the first meeting after December 31.
MR. MULLINS. Mr. Chairman, I would nominate for the position
of Vice Chairman a person amply qualified to fulfill the recent Irish
tradition, even if he speaks clearly, Bill McDonough.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other nominations? If not, we have
one individual [nominated] and I will ask for yeas and nays. All in
favor say "aye."
SEVERAL.

Aye.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I assume that there was
somebody out there with a "no" vote, but you didn't want to know about
it! Anyway welcome, Bill.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm looking forward to your working with
the rest of us in this new position; the work is not all that much
different from your previous activity, but it clearly has a very
different spin to it and we wish you well.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you. It's an honor and a
privilege. Having sat at the other end of the table for a year and a

-2-

8/17/93

half, I can appreciate the very real importance of what we do here.
It also gave me the opportunity to think about whether any sane person
would wish to move from that end of the table to this end. And I came
to the conclusion one should. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That was not an answer to your question!
For the first item of general business I'd like to call on Gretchen
Greene to report on the operations of the Foreign Currency Desk.
MS. GREENE. Well, Mr. McDonough has set a very high standard
for me.
He says he'll talk loudly and clearly. If I don't talk
loudly and clearly, please let me know; I'll try to speak either
slower or louder.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The first thing is to make sure your
microphone isn't covered up by anything!
MS. GREENE.
I will try.
[Statement--Ms. Greene's statement
cannot be found in the Committee's files.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't recall any evidence that the
French or any of the others actually have covered their borrowed
positions in any [significant] amounts against the deutschemark since
the debacle. Is that correct?
MS. GREENE.
It is correct that we do not have that evidence.
What we don't know is whether they are succeeding in picking up some
reserves and waiting to tell us of their operations when they are more
successful. But you are right; we do not have any clear evidence that
they have been successful. And until today the French franc had
looked a little heavy. So, the opportunities really were not obvious
for them to acquire marks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, with the approximately $70
billion--even with, say, a 3 or 4 percent decline in exchange rates or
ultimately more--if they're going to have to cover at some point, this
will be a very large hit on the budgets of those countries. I noticed
that there was
Is that true of the other
countries as well?
MS. GREENE.
The accounting on reserves varies [greatly] from
country to country, and the sharing of the loss in a case like this-where the French, for example, borrowed marks in an EMS arrangement-is also unclear to us.
In other words, whether or not there's some
kind of loss-sharing arrangement within the EMS that has been agreed
to is something we are not fully confident we understand. But if it
were true that the country that is doing the borrowing has to cover at
market rates, you are right, the consequences in terms of the profits
of the central banks on their foreign exchange transactions and how
that is reflected in a fiscal deficit could be a significant number.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Other questions?

MS. PHILLIPS.
Do you have any sense as to where the demand
for the yen is coming from?

8/17/93

MS. GREENE. Certainly one important element is that the
capital outflow, which had been a counterweight to Japan's current
account surplus, has been far smaller than is typically the case.
Now, obviously, there's a capital [outflow] to balance the surplus in
an accounting sense. But the [ex ante] demand to send funds abroad by
Japanese investors has pretty much dried up. They did invest a fair
amount and they were very active investors in the second quarter in
the European markets, taking advantage of the sharp drop in interest
rates, particularly in countries of the EMS other than Germany. And,
of course, they got burned by what has happened with the European
monetary system. And we believe that one of the reasons why the yen
advanced so much more rapidly than the dollar in July was that these
investors were hedging their exposures in French francs and other
[currencies].
We do not think they liquidated their investments
because they thought that the breakup of the EMS would prompt a larger
cut in interest rates than has taken place and they wanted to be there
to get the capital gains. But apart from that burst of [what might be
called] an outward investment into Europe immediately after the French
elections, the outflow has been small by comparison to previous years.
So that is probably the single biggest fact:
The reluctance of the
Japanese investment companies and insurance companies and investment
trusts to make meaningful outward investment in other countries.
MS. PHILLIPS.
MS. GREENE.
MS. PHILLIPS.

So they're demanding more yen?
They are demanding fewer dollars.
So it's just sort of a relative thing.

MS. GREENE. Yes. As this has built up, of course, we have
seen the Japanese companies responding differently, as I mentioned.
Previously they had believed that the dollar would recover and
therefore they would be able to sell dollars at a higher rate, so they
were willing to hold their dollar exposures. As that belief has
faded, people are saying:
"I have to cut my losses; I just have to
get out of these currencies regardless of what the exchange rate is."
And that's when we observed the Japanese exporters constantly reducing
the dollar price at which they were willing to sell; in the past
couple of weeks that has been an important additional factor.
MR. FORRESTAL. Gretchen, do you think the French are really
serious about this imposition of exchange controls or is it just a
public relations ploy to try to frighten the speculators?
If they
were to do this, it would seem to me to be another blow toward-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. [Unintelligible] just a few minutes ago
indicated that that was not his plan. That's not an answer to your
question, I understand; but that's at least what he said in Tokyo.
MS. GREENE.
I think there is growing concern about the type
of market participants; these participants are difficult for the
authorities to have contact with. In the past the large players have
been banks which the central banks know and understand; now we have a
class of market participants--call them hedge funds or investment
trusts or whatever you want to call them--who exert enormous market
power and for whom there is not the same kind of relationship with the
monetary authorities. The authorities don't know who they are; they
don't know why they do these things. And, of course, these funds have

8/17/93

built up huge investment positions in all countries. And when they
get scared, the hedging of those portfolios--just because of the way
the hedging is done--is enough to have a very sudden and substantial
impact on the exchange rate, which comes at the most awkward time from
the point of view of the central banks.
So, I think there is a
growing level of frustration, and I guess the question is:
Where does
that frustration ultimately lead?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?
to the Domestic Desk and Joan Lovett.

If not, let's move

MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope you can hear me
down at that end also.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Ms. Lovett?
I guess you
covered [everything].
Would somebody like to move to ratify the
actions of the Desk since the last meeting?
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on to
our economic discussions with Messrs. Prell and Siegman.
MR. PRELL.
I always thought being audible got me into more
trouble!
I thought the example set by Mr. Volcker and Mr. Corrigan
might be the one I should follow, but I'll try to follow my
colleagues' example this morning. Having asked the Committee to
endure a very long presentation last month I shall be quite brief this
morning.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
MR. SIEGMAN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. SYRON. Mike, in looking at autos and at the pattern that
we see before us, I was wondering if we had any feel on the leasing
side on whether there is--and how much--an incentive factor that might
come along like earlier incentives that we saw on prices.
Specifically, I'm thinking about the leasing terms which seem to be in
some ways similar to the direct price sales promotional devices we saw
earlier. How much do they really shade the residuals very, very
closely? Are they even going negative on the residuals as an
incentive kind of thing? In terms of having some view of what is
going to happen to sales going forward, I wonder whether this is
likely to reverse at some point.
MR. PRELL. Well, I think we had some discussion of this in
the Greenbook. Pinning down the amount of the leasing transactions
with consumers is a little difficult.
There is some survey evidence
that we're aware of that suggests that perhaps a quarter of the
consumer car sales have leases. And that does seem to have been the
way that the major manufacturers have gone as a substitute to some
degree for the kind of price shaving they previously had done--rebates
and other techniques. Clearly, they've been trying to firm up their

8/17/93

margins. One step was to diminish the flow of cars going through the
rental companies that come back as nearly new and are perceived as
fairly close substitutes for the new cars. That was partly a response
to a general rise in retail demand, which meant they didn't have to
sell the cars on concessionary terms [nor did] the rental car
companies.
If demand remains on the uptrend we think we're seeing,
and with the Japanese car prices likely to be under even more pressure
than we might have anticipated in light of the further appreciation of
the yen, there may be some further tightening up of that market, with
some firming of prices either through less aggressive residual
valuations on the leases or through other devices.
But I don't think
we have that good an insight into what trick they're going to use.
MR. SYRON. We have a feeling that this is the same sort of
timing that happened before. We think that these [kinds of
incentives] are going to be offered for a discrete number of weeks in
some cases, never mind months, and that they will be removed at some
point.
MR. PRELL. Well, they seem to have maintained incentives.
They've broadened them recently. We don't think they are as deep or
quite so broad as we've seen at the end of some other model year
clearance periods because the stocks are pretty [low].
So, we might
enter the new year with less overhang of prior year models. The "end
of year" has gotten a bit vaguer. We see new models coming out at
different times of the year; and in the case of Chrysler, one of the
reasons they're pushing so hard now is that they're going to be
bringing out new models at the end of this year, sort of a '94-1/2
[model].
So, there's a lot going on here. Our sense is that there is
a more moderate level of promotional activity going on than there was
[at the same time] a year or two ago. And that trend will probably
persist for some period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Thank you. Mike, there was an appendix in Part
II of the Greenbook on the Budget Reconciliation Act that I think was
It would seem as though the onevery informative and interesting.
for-one in terms of tax increases and spending cuts looks fairly
legitimate there. I also got the impression that perhaps it was not
quite as backloaded in terms of expenditure cuts as originally had
been the case. Are there any defining issues in terms of spending
cuts that are making it less than the pure number? Are they of any
significance, because I know that was a major criticism earlier in the
process? And I wonder if you could just comment on how this has all
changed because I know the last Greenbook had a ratio of 8 to 1 for
1994 in terms of tax increases versus expenditure cuts. And, of
course, Boskin had that article in the Wall Street Journal that had a
9 to 1 ratio for the entire period. It seems as though there have
been some very dramatic changes.
MR. PRELL. Well, to be honest I can't give you a neat
accounting on this. We didn't perceive that the outcome was
drastically different from what we've been assuming previously. The
major change was the smaller energy tax than we'd been anticipating.
We thought they'd come out somewhere between the House and the Senate
[bills] and [in fact] there wasn't any concession [to the lower Senate
version].
[Unintelligible] reduction number they moved them to full

8/17/93

-6-

Other changes were quite minor. And as we
retro-activity for 1993.
noted last time, the baseline from which we were measuring that tax
deficit reduction last time isn't the same as the accounting that was
going on here. We perceived [the reduction] to be rather heavily on
the revenue side. A good bit of the indicated expenditure cut is
attributable to the cumulative effects of the lower deficit on
I suppose it's legitimate--it's an expenditure--but
interest costs.
whether it's a high powered expenditure or not is another matter. But
we perceived that it's enough on the tax side and there's enough of a
case to be made that the GDP aggregate demand effects of tax increases
may be somewhat less than expenditure cuts to suggest that the damping
effect on economic activity would be less than if they had gone as far
as some had advocated on the expenditure side. But we still see it as
a substantial fiscal contraction, depending on how one looks at this-liabilities or cash basis and so on. It's either a tremendous
restraint in 1994 or a substantial restraint in '93 and again in '94.
So, we're looking at the consumption behavior and so on, and we would
allocate some of that restraint to 1993.
MR. PARRY. In some past times there have been fee increases
that were counted as expenditure cuts; is there much of that?
MR. PRELL. I don't think there is a lot of that in this.
There is obviously still talk of doing some things in terms of grazing
fees and mining and so on; those aren't big dollars. But, no, I don't
think there is much of that in here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?
like to start our tour de table?

If not, who would

MR. KEEHN. Let me start off, Mr. Chairman. Other than the
flood, which certainly has been a serious event for those who are
directly involved, I would not have to comment on any significant
changes in the District economy since the last meeting. Broadly,
things seem very much the same.
The auto business continues to be
strong. As we get closer to the end of 1993, the industry is raising
its sales forecasts for the year. Third-quarter production schedules
are running about 20 percent over last year and the expectation is
that the fourth-quarter schedules will be higher than last year but
that the margin will be much smaller. I will say, though, that there
is something of a growing concern in Detroit that the auto business
has run ahead of the national economy. And unless the employment and
disposable income gains catch up, the sales levels could be at some
jeopardy. Order flows for heavy trucks have slowed a bit but the
industry doesn't, at least so far, view this as significant. They are
coming off a very strong period and I think the current softness may
well be a reflection of the summer doldrums.
In the steel business, the outcome of the trade cases, while
certainly disappointing from their perspective, is anticipated to
reduce annual domestic shipments by about 2 million tons. Also, this
is going to have a limiting effect on price increases. They had
announced an increase of 2-1/2 percent for October that is clearly not
going to stick. And they now think that the next increase will not be
earlier than next January. Despite this, though, the underlying
business continues to be good and they are forecasting shipments this
year at about 86 to 87 million tons. Contrary to the national
numbers, retail sales in the District in July were comparatively good.

8/17/93

Some of the larger chains that had been having a difficult time
experienced some pretty strong gains.
In the ag sector it is still, of course, premature to judge
the full economic impact of the flood. But in a broader perspective,
I don't think the effect will be nearly as large as one might guess by
watching the television coverage on it.
Growing conditions in many
areas that are not directly affected have really been very good. And
with higher crop prices, farm income this year is expected to be
pretty good. But I will say that because the growing cycle is behind
by several weeks this year--we got a late start you may remember and
all the wetness has delayed the growing cycle--an early frost this
year would be a much more significant problem than would normally be
the case.
In the ag equipment business, the level of activity
continues to be pretty high. Retail sales from one manufacturer that
I talked to are running some 20 percent ahead of last year and because
their inventories are reasonably low their production in the current
quarter is running some 25 percent over last year. One manufacturer
of construction equipment notes that business is up because equipment
is being used in the cleanup after the flood.
With regard to inflation, I continue to be impressed by how
restrained the price pressures seem to be. Many manufacturers say the
cost of their outside purchases this year will increase by only 1
percent or even a little less.
One large manufacturer that I talked
'to says that in fact they are going to have a reduction in their
outside purchase prices and costs this year of about 1 percent.
Virtually everybody we talk to--it's true for retailers and
manufacturers--says that marketplace pressures are very, very tough
and that there just aren't any signs of widespread price increases.
On a somewhat continuing somber note, I think the line on this
restraint on hiring that we keep hearing about is getting harder and
harder with the passage of time.
[Firms] just will not take on
additional full-time employees, and they are continuing to rely on
overtime and out-sourcing to deal with their increased production
requirements. While out-sourcing does increase employment, at least
in an indirect sense, it's not the same kind of employment increase
that we've had in past cycles.
And I must say this employment
restraint has become something of an absolute mindset among a growing
number of CEOs.
Turning to the national economy, the outlook is almost
surprisingly unchanged, very much in line with the forecast that we
developed at the time of the last meeting of the FOMC. I think that
at this point the risks are about evenly balanced. But I must say it
does seem like a pretty unexciting outlook. Thank you.
MR. ANGELL.
Si, the late start on planting:
Is that pretty
universal throughout your District all the way from Iowa to Michigan?
MR. KEEHN. It's certainly true in Iowa, Wisconsin, and
Michigan, not quite so much in Indiana. Indiana is going to have a
good year, much better than they've had in the past.
MR. ANGELL.

And Indiana had ample moisture?

Production in Indiana looks good and they
MR. KEEHN. Yes.
are delighted with the high prices.

8/17/93

MR. ANGELL.

And Illinois, I presume, is like

[the others]?

MR. KEEHN. Not as good as Indiana. It's between Iowa and
[Laughter]--it should be obvious it's between Iowa and Indiana!

moved!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Parry.

I'm delighted to hear Illinois hasn't

MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in
much of the Twelfth District clearly remains weaker than that for the
nation as a whole. District employment fell at a 2 percent annual
rate in June, marking the fourth consecutive monthly decline. The
fall in employment was due largely to job losses in California and
Washington. California has now completed three years of recession;
between July 1990 and July 1993 the state lost 560,000 jobs, with
180,000 of those jobs lost during the last year. However, the July
employment report was somewhat more encouraging. We did see an
increase in California of 34,000 as far as payroll employment is
concerned. But half of this increase was due to a rise in state and
local government employment that is linked to unusual seasonal
factors.
Civilian employment also increased during July. However,
there was a very large surge in the labor force and it caused the
unemployment rate to rise from 9.1 to 9.8 percent. Despite the July
report, already announced layoffs and reports from contacts suggest
continued weakness in several sectors of the California economy. We
believe that the state will bump along the bottom and remain a drag on
District growth for the foreseeable future.
Conditions in the state of Washington are also of concern,
particularly in the Puget Sound area. Recent employment reports for
the state have been disappointing; for June employment in the state
actually fell at an annualized rate of 5.7 percent. Significant
In
losses were seen in manufacturing, construction, and trade.
aerospace, employment has fallen 7.4 percent over the past year,
largely as a result of cutbacks by Boeing. In addition, recent
reports suggest that Boeing may cut its production more than called
for by currently published plans.
Conditions in the rest of the District are mixed, with robust
conditions in the inter-mountain states and flat or sluggish
conditions elsewhere. A depressed visitor industry has stalled the
Three
Hawaiian economy. In contrast, the Nevada boom continues.
major hotel projects will add 10,000 rooms in Las Vegas this coming
winter to the existing stock of 76,000 rooms.
Construction jobs in
Nevada are up 20 percent over the past year.
Turning to the national economy, although one could certainly
quibble with specific numbers in the Greenbook forecast, I think the
basic message of moderate growth is certainly the most likely outcome
over the next year and a half.
I'd have to admit, though, that I'm a
bit more optimistic about inflation than is the Greenbook. We have
had three consecutive months of very low inflation, which is
consistent with the view that a good part of the inflation scare that
we had earlier this year was an aberration. And given the current
slack in labor markets and also the prospects for continued moderate
economic growth, it seems to me that inflation could come in a bit
lower than is shown in the Greenbook. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

8/17/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I think my report will be a little
happier than Bob Parry's, Mr. Chairman.
MR. PARRY.

That shouldn't be hard!

MR. FORRESTAL. Except for Nevada! Having said that, though,
growth in the Sixth District is continuing to decelerate. Our
expansion is still leading the nation but we anticipate that the
margin will narrow, with the possible exception of Georgia. We're
estimating that at the end of July the unemployment rate for the
District was just under 6 percent; but at the same time our survey of
manufacturing plants in the District suggests that little or no growth
in employment is likely to occur over the next six months.
In fact,
the survey actually shows a decline, but we think there are some
seasonal factors in there. But the clear message is that
manufacturers just are not looking to add employees at all.
The
survey also suggests that production was weak in July even after
taking account of what likely were seasonal declines in activity.
The areas of strength that we're continuing to see in the
Sixth District have been in retail sales, particularly in durables,
and in new orders for exports, although exports are not a major part
of our District output mix. The strength in durables comes basically
from good activity in single-family housing. While the pace of sales
flattened in some areas in July, it was well ahead of healthy year-ago
levels. The inventories of unsold new homes have been shrinking so
new building has been quite brisk. The inventory situation has caused
resales to do better and contract prices have started to rise in
several places around the District.
The multifamily sector is still
stalled, but there has been some improvement in absorption.
Just to tick off a couple of particular areas of activity in
the District, the Atlanta metro area is now beginning to see the first
effects of the upcoming Olympics.
The contracts for a couple of
venues have now been let and some of the construction will begin soon.
Also, office space absorption in the first half of this year was twice
as high as [observers] had expected. Facilities and infra-structure
building are continuing to add to employment.
On the negative side, base closings in Florida, which is our
most populous state, continue to exert a negative pull on that state's
economy. The pressures on state budgets are moderating, but this is
largely due to special factors, particularly gambling [activity].
Gambling is adding significantly to the coffers in Mississippi. And
as you may have read, Georgia has just started a lottery and the
lottery ticket sales have been running well ahead of expectations.
I'm not sure that's the most desirable kind of economic activity to
have, but there it is.
Higher natural gas prices have increased the
rig count in Louisiana and they're helping that state considerably.
Unlike the Midwest we've been experiencing drought; and in many areas
in the Southeast that's hurting agriculture, although again that's a
relatively small factor in our output mix.
So, on balance, conditions are reasonably good as they have
been for some time. Concerns that I hear basically relate more to the
national and international areas than to the District. Some of the

8/17/93

-10-

uncertainty surrounding the budget process has been removed with the
passage of the legislation. But there still is a good deal of concern
about the health [care] program and the costs that may be coming along
in conjunction with that. There's also, interestingly, a great deal
of concern about the NAFTA legislation--there's a good deal of support
for NAFTA in the District--and that there may be some difficulty with
passage in the Congress.
Looking at the national picture, our outlook for 1993 is the
same as the Greenbook's. But we do see stronger real GDP and
employment growth in 1994. We're estimating that business will start
to add labor in the months ahead as some of these public policy
uncertainties unwind and current staffing levels become too tight. I
think that's got to be a gambling type of forecast because we
certainly don't hear very much about employment gains. But the view
of our staff is that there's going to come a point when business will
simply not be able to continue with present levels of temporary
employees and overtime. We have pretty much the same outlook for
inflation on average, though upward pressures begin to emerge near the
end of the forecast horizon. It seems clear to me that many of the
fundamentals are in place for a continuation of the expansion. And
that will take up some of the slack in the economy and perhaps move
the expansion above potential at least for a while.
I think, though, that there are uncertainties surrounding the
outlook. On the positive side, I certainly feel a little more
comfortable about the European situation. I think their recovery will
occur a little sooner than we had expected. Also, the recent declines
in long-term interest rates will certainly be beneficial. On the
negative side, we have the continuing uncertainties surrounding
consumer and business attitudes growing out of the health care program
and perhaps continuing contentious debate about the budget. But the
major concern that I hear relating to uncertainty is that federal
spending may not be cut as much as had been hoped and that the
initiatives will end up being funded by indirect taxes on business
payrolls. It's difficult to assess the net impact of all these
factors, but I am a little concerned--or maybe more than a little
concerned--that the forecast for real GDP this year has fallen by
almost a full percentage point since our March meeting. And the Board
staff estimate for 1994 has now been reduced by an additional 1/2
percentage point since then. So, in conclusion, I'm concerned that
the risks to the forecast are that growth will remain sluggish for
longer than we anticipate and that unemployment will continue to be at
unacceptably high levels. Thank you.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, might I just add something? An
earlier comment--the comment about the medical expenses--raises an
interesting point. One of the major savings on the mandatory spending
side is the cuts in Medicare and Medicaid costs. Economically one
would anticipate a lot of cost shifting here, which might call into
question exactly how one wants to view the quality of this expenditure
reduction. There are also some user fees, things like the FCC auction
expectations and so on; but I think that medical cost issue is a very
big one, looking back.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

8/17/93

MR. BOEHNE. The District economy continues to muddle along.
I could almost ditto my comments of a month or so ago. The pattern is
essentially the same:
sluggish manufacturing, soft retail sales, some
improvement in residential construction, nonresidential in a deep
hole, and slow employment growth. This attitude of not adding workers
if we don't have to is very strong. Wage increases are probably in
the 4 to 4-1/2 percent range; that is what one hears from most
companies in the area.
On the national level, I think the moderate growth theme is
the right one; 2-1/2 percent is the number if one wants to pinpoint
it.
It's hard to see major risks that would cause a significant
break-out on the up side. Likewise, it's hard to see a break-out on
the down side that would cause a cumulative downturn. Nonetheless, we
have had this pattern, as Bob Forrestal just pointed out, of starting
out the year more optimistically and then scaling down our growth
forecasts.
I think there is a business attitude that if you have a
good quarter, you take it but you don't think it's going to continue
at that pace; and if you have a bad quarter, you say well, maybe we
ought to scale down the forecast. While we're not talking about major
risks on either side, I suspect that if we're wrong we may have
somewhat more sluggish economic growth. On inflation I think the
numbers that we are seeing now do understate the underlying rate of
inflation just as the numbers earlier in the year overstated it. My
sense is that we're not likely to see an acceleration of inflation
from the underlying fundamentals just as I doubt that we'll see much
of a deceleration. I think we just are kind of stuck where we are
with inflation. So, it's pretty much a no change, unexciting, and not
particularly satisfying outlook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Regarding our
District, there really hasn't been much change in our region either,
like many other regions in the reports so far. Growth seems to be
continuing at a relatively moderate pace overall.
We are experiencing
the same strengthening in housing activity that, at least from the
Beigebook reports, I take it may be occurring in some other parts of
the country, although I guess it doesn't conform very well with the
figure you reported earlier, Mike. Also, tourist activity in our
region has been very, very strong especially along the coast in recent
weeks. Despite this auto episode, Mr. Chairman, the mood of most of
our business contacts is less optimistic now than it was even as
recently as the July meeting.
I think people are worried about the
tax increase that now definitely will be coming.
If anything, they
may even be more worried about what the health care reform package,
when we get it, will do to them. And I think these concerns are
clearly having a negative impact on economic activity, especially on
employment in our region; that has been happening for some time. But
it strikes me that, if anything, that negative may have intensified
most recently.
As far as the national economy is concerned, I wouldn't argue
with the Greenbook's real GDP projections at this point. Initially
when I saw the 2.3 percent annual rate of growth in real GDP that
you're projecting for the second half of the year, Mike, it struck me
as a little on the low side in light of the strong final demand in the
second quarter, the evidence of at least some strength in housing, and

-12-

8/17/93

the nice sharp decline in long-term interest rates. But the negative
attitudes that the budget package has fostered, as I said a minute
ago, are very real; and I don't think there's any doubt that it could
put a significant drag on the economy in the months ahead. So, 2.3
percent growth strikes me as reasonable at this point.
If I had to
guess, I would say the risks may be just slightly on the up side but
not very much.
Now, having said all of this about real economic activity,
let me just say that I think the most important development since our
last meeting has been on the inflation and interest rate fronts. It
may well be that the recent price data are overstating the progress
we're making, but I'm at least somewhat encouraged by what I've seen.
Core CPI has risen at an annual rate of about 2-1/2 percent over the
last five months, which is a pretty good hunk of time. And with the
July figure, the annualized rate of increase in the core CPI so far in
1993 for the first time has dropped a little below the 1992 rate.
Again, it may overstate the progress we're making but, as I think Bob
Parry suggested, it strikes me that while we can't be sure yet we may
finally be making some progress toward bringing the longer-term trend
inflation rate down.
The other positive, and I think clearly related, development
is the nice decline we've had recently in long-term interest rates.
As I recall the projections that were made back at the beginning of
the year, the consensus forecast for the 30-year bond rate was about
7-1/2 percent; and I don't believe anybody was looking for anything as
low as 6-1/2 percent, where we are now. Clearly, the budget package
has played a role in this either because of its prospective deficit
reduction or maybe because people think it's going to knock the heck
out of the economy. But whatever contribution the fiscal side has
made in bringing long-term rates down, I think there's a good chance
that our recent monetary policy actions and statements have also
played at least an equal role, or perhaps even a greater role. The
news of a tilt toward tightness at the May meeting, and the overall
tone or emphasis of your comments at the Humphrey-Hawkins meeting, Mr.
Chairman, I think have sent strong signals to the markets and to the
public that, whatever may have happened in the past, this time around
we are quite serious about keeping inflation under control as the
recovery proceeds. So, in short, I think we've bought some additional
credibility recently, and I think that has contributed significantly
to the rally in the bond market. I would hope that with policy we
won't do anything to reverse that progress because it strikes me that
the improved financial conditions are probably the main thing the
economy has going for it right now. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, similar to many
other places, I'd say that the region's economy continues to muddle
along; it's not accelerating but it's not slowing either. The only
thing that is really strong--and this is a comment some other people
have made--is the lottery industry and the gambling industry. In
fact, you have to be an Indian tribe to have an operating permit.
This has started a new cottage industry among bankruptcy lawyers who,
fortunately, now are finding lots of work in trying to determine how
many people are required to declare a separate tribe so you can get a

8/17/93

-13-

franchise to build a casino--I'm not kidding--because it really is an
extraordinary license.
Our pattern is very similar to the country as a whole in the
sense that the retail sector is mixed. It's not collapsing;
inventories seem pretty good and there's very little price pressure.
We talk to retailers and they're poised to try to increase margins but
then complain that they can't. They say they have to increase margins
at some point, but they haven't been able to do so. The manufacturing
sector depends very much on the product line. I had a little concern
from a regional perspective regarding the sectors that have been
strong for us because we have a fair number of companies that supply
the auto industry. They've done quite well, but obviously the outlook
for auto sales influences that. Also, our computer companies, while
not doing as well as those in some other parts of the country, are
starting to see improvement. With regard to this funny situation
between measuring output and [unintelligible] inputs, I was just
looking at the data that we produce for regional production measures.
And we see the computer [measure] is coming up; their employment is
going down sharply and their revenues do not look terribly good, but
there are more and more "mips" being produced out there. At some
point one starts to wonder about how homogenous mips are, whether they
are a good deflator for this whole [industry], and how much more
I just wonder how much of the dramatic
output there is in fact.
increase we saw in producers' durable equipment, in computers
particularly, is very heavily influenced by this measurement question
on what is being produced. People in high-tech industries-instruments, medical equipment and the like--are expressing continued
concerns about foreign sales, including some new signs of softness in
the U.K., which a couple of companies talked about. Housing, as other
people have commented, has improved; actually, it has improved a fair
bit in New England. We see at least some firming of prices even in
the second home industry.
In the financial sector, banks are starting to see some
slight improvement--an upward trend in business lending and some
improvement on the consumer side. The mutual fund industry continues
to see very, very strong inflows and there is continued nervousness
about where they're going to put the money. Harkening back to a
comment Gretchen made about hedges in the foreign exchange market, in
the institutional funds a lot of people are talking about having found
inefficiencies in spreads in the overseas markets compared to the U.S.
market--for example, looking at dollar-denominated versus pounddenominated GMAC paper--and are going heavily into those investments.
They are doing the same thing in some of the other markets and then
hedging heavily. Now, of course, we'll see how effective these hedges
are, but people are talking about just enormous flows in that area.
Consistent with what other people also have said, we've had a very,
very good year for tourism, the best probably in four or five years.
Some of this is weather-related. An explanation is that tourists
prefer to drive when there is uncertainty.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
States in your District!

You even got the President of the United

MR. SYRON. That's right. He has not been welcomed with open
arms by many of the people in Martha's Vineyard, but it's a unique
place! But the way that most people are looking at it is that at

-14-

8/17/93

least it's an island, so they spin off from the rest of the region.
The interesting thing is that President Bush's area of Kennebunkport,
Maine draws more heavily now than when he was President in terms of a
People--this is very, very micro-President-related tourism aspect.
are less frightened about going there because they think it won't be
as big a hassle. That area is actually busier now, selling T-shirts
and all that stuff, than before.
As far as the U.S. economy goes, I think the Greenbook has it
pretty much right.
I would think that the risks are pretty balanced
I'm not sure that I'd put exactly the
the way the Greenbook has it.
same weight on the consequences if we are right on one side or the
other. But in terms of the likelihood of what is going to happen, I
think it's about right. In terms of going forward now, no matter
which side, an awful lot comes down to this question of what happens
to employment and to incomes.
That's because there is a question of
how much longer we can continue seeing good consumption without the
growth rate in incomes. This is the sort of tension that goes along,
and history will see how it resolves itself.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the Tenth District
the economy, as I say every time, continues to grow modestly. Retail
sales seem to be holding up. Construction activity has so far been
strong; this strength is primarily focused, though, on the residential
area. Oil and gas drilling has picked up in the past and that's
primarily due to the gas portion of that industry. Coal output in
Wyoming has slowed, though, primarily because of the transportation
problems in getting that coal to the Midwest and South. There has
been some interruption there but it should be very temporary since
inventories are down. Manufacturing activity remains quite sluggish.
We've seen some continuing drop-off in jobs in that sector just as
we've seen nationally. The effect of the flooding is likely to reduce
crop output in our area in Nebraska, Missouri, and a little in Kansas
particularly in corn and soybeans; but there's not much effect on the
wheat crop as we see it right now. On the whole, prospects in
agriculture should remain healthy despite this reduction in crops
because of price effects. Construction activity should remain good,
focused on housing. We have one matter [of concern] in the Denver
area. That airport has about 13,000 infrastructure jobs; the work is
to be finished [soon] and they have to out-place that. And of course
the vacancy rate in Denver, while improved, is still rather
substantial, so I think they'll have a bit of a transition issue in
that area. We also think that our natural gas drilling activity
should remain fairly good. But as far as manufacturing goes, we see
no real signs of strength except perhaps with the auto plants that
should be at full capacity. Generally, manufacturing is very weak in
our area.
At the national level, as I've heard many others say here, we
are revising our estimates down; we are a little more optimistic than
the Greenbook but not enough to matter. And we see inflation in
check, but we are not of the mind that it's improving very
significantly; we're still looking at around the 3 percent range.
Slack in the economy, though, should keep inflation at least not
worsening. And the outlook for growth in 1994 continues to look very
modest to us. In one sense the uncertainty has changed from what the

8/17/93

-15-

fiscal package will be to what the effects of the fiscal package will
be and then we add on health care [uncertainty] to that.
So we see a
very uncertain future and pretty modest growth going on into 1994.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the regional
economy is concerned, it remains reasonably healthy, which is the
report I have been providing for quite some time now. In general,
construction is quite strong; retail sales are pretty good;
manufacturing is mixed; tourism, at least in the western part of the
District, has been strong. We did run a special survey of about 100
bankers in the areas of the District affected by the floods.
I guess
it's reassuring to report that they didn't have anything very
startling to say in the sense that while crop losses in some cases are
substantial, they are not expecting major spillover effects on
economic activity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Spillover!

MR. STERN. Yes, spillover. I'm glad you picked up on that;
I was waiting for somebody to do that.
They were not expecting major
spillover effects in many other areas of economic activity. And, of
course, we may get a little subsequent stimulus down the road from
rebuilding and so forth.
With regard to the national economy, we have been debating
whether this sort of "slow motion" recovery was going to accelerate
and turn into more rapid growth; that debate is continuing at least
internally. But for the moment I have concluded, as I have in the
past, that the Greenbook has it about right. That is, I don't see the
seeds of an acceleration in place. So I think this very modest
expansion at the national level is likely to continue and, therefore,
I find myself in agreement with what I guess is the consensus. As far
as inflation is concerned, maybe in part because of the publicity
surrounding the asymmetric directive and your testimony or whatever, a
lot of people have gone out of their way recently to tell me that they
aren't seeing any inflationary pressures in their businesses at all.
And some people have gone beyond that to report that they've tried to
raise prices and haven't been able to make those increases stick.
That suggests to me that people are still learning. They are willing
to go out there and send letters to their customers that as of a
certain date prices on certain lines are going up, and I guess what
they tend to hear in response is that their customers will not accept
these price increases and that they don't care what the underlying
rationale may be.
So, I conclude that people are still learning about
the state of the markets and their inability to make price increases
last, and that probably [augurs] well for the longer run.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Last month I said that the Eleventh District
economy had weakened a little relative to the national economy, but
that appears to have been temporary. Recent statistics in the
District appear to be somewhat stronger, particularly employment
growth, and the anecdotal information is somewhat more positive. We
seem to be benefiting in some cases from weaknesses elsewhere in the
country. For example, the Austin area seems to be gaining a good bit

8/17/93

-16-

of employment from firms either expanding out of or moving out of
California. We hear a lot about mortgage refinancing; just about
everybody in Texas who didn't buy a house in the mid '80s and is
therefore still under water seems to be refinancing their mortgages,
including myself. I was doing that several weeks ago but I had to
drop out of the market following your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony; it
brought my rate up a little bit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sorry about that!

MR. MCTEER. So if you'll hold off until next Monday I'll be
[Laughter]
Since I haven't taken much time, I thought you
grateful!
might like to hear about a couple of comments from our Beigebook
respondents.
California seems to be on the mind of a number of them.
One told our research people that a company wanting to plant a tree in
Los Angeles County has to get permission from 8 different agencies; to
chop it down requires 47 permits. And in Dallas County you can do
either one of those things without a permit. A local banker told one
of our people that a client of his in north Los Angeles was so
frustrated with water quality standards at his plant that he submitted
plain tap water to be tested, and the water quality agency judged that
the water was not fit to be dumped into the sewer system. Finally, we
would appreciate your support of NAFTA--all of you; it's going to be
close.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. As far as the District goes, we generally have
been outperforming the nation during this expansion although in the
latest three-month period employment growth has been a little worse
than sluggish; we've had slight declines.
I don't think there's much
flood effect in that, however. What I might do is just make a few
comments on the flood; St. Louis has really been the center of that.
And as Si said, for those who are directly affected it's very
devastating. But what is striking is the small percentage of the
population that is actually affected; it's about 1 to 2 percent.
In
the Bank we have 800 employees and 6 or 8 families that are affected
in some way, and I'd say that's quite representative. I think the
assessment that the broad economic impact is going to be relatively
narrow is on target. Clearly, there have been some crop losses and
some disruption of jobs, but really very little.
One of the main
ongoing effects is going to be the impact on transportation. We've
had roads washed out and it will be a long time before the barge
traffic can move on the river. Basically what I hear from our
directors and others is that [transportation problems] are adding to
costs somewhat and it's a bit of a nuisance, but goods are basically
getting moved. I think that will be with us for a while.
Like Gary Stern, we did a survey of banks. We basically
picked the counties on either side of the river--the Mississippi,
Missouri, and Illinois rivers--and talked to about 200 banks. They
constitute about 10 percent of District banking assets; and 80 percent
of those banks are less than $100 million, so they are principally
small banking operations. What struck me through the whole thing--and
Gary touched on this--was how little disruption to operations
occurred. We picked this up on the survey although it would not have
been obvious from our own activities. Thirty-one banks had some
disruption in operations--either carriers having difficulty getting in

8/17/93

-17-

or out or actually having to make other arrangements, such as having
their deliveries made to other processing centers or otherwise moving
their processing. And 19 facilities, either head offices or branches,
were evacuated because of flooding. We hear concerns about liquidity
--no pun intended--but there has been only one discount window loan,
an adjustment credit loan, that was at all associated with floodrelated problems that I'm aware of up to this point in time. The big
uncertainty looking down the road really is on credit quality. But,
again, I don't think that's going to be a significant factor even from
a District perspective.
I would say most of the banks are looking for
less than a 10 percent impact in terms of their loan portfolios.
And
of the 200 we talked to there are roughly 25 that think the impact
will be greater than 10 percent. There will be a few banks--and these
would be basically ag banks in small towns where both the agricultural
loans and the business loans in the community would be affected--that
could have problems.
But they are relatively small.
In fact, all of
those 25 banking organizations have $50 million in total assets or
less. We will stay in touch with this. In a sense, while the crisis
has passed, I think we're dealing with the worst part of it right now
in terms of the cleanup and rebuilding. And that will take some time.
On the national front, just a couple of comments:
Similar to
what Al said, I've been very pleased with how expectations with
respect to policy have shifted without really trashing the markets.
It wasn't too long ago when the expectation was that we were on a oneway street for lower rates [and we've moved] to a period now, I guess,
where expectations are fairly balanced. But the Chairman made it
pretty clear in his testimony that there is the possibility that they
will be moving up, and that has been very well received, I would say.
Done differently, one could imagine a good deal of short-term turmoil
in the markets, which we really haven't had with that shift in
expectations. Who knows how to sort it out, but there may be some
beneficial impact, as Al observed, in the longer end of the market.
The other thing that is extraordinary, particularly given the
perception the last time around, is that the pressures on monetary
policy emanating from a deficit reduction package have really been
muted and well contained. And I think that's quite an accomplishment
from the politicians and the press.
One of the things I have a little concern about is the fact
that to some extent we are a bit at sea internally in terms of what we
ought to be looking at. We've had problems with M2; we went through
the Feinman/Porter [study]; we talked about an M2+; the Chairman
mentioned real interest rates. And I think one of the things that we
need to be careful not to do is to convey a lot of confusion in the
central bank about what we ought to be doing. This is, and always has
been, basically a judgmental matter; and I think the judgments have
been very good during this period. To the extent that we roll out too
many different possibilities in rapid succession, in terms of what we
ought to be looking at, it's possible we could convey a sense of
confusion about what we ought to be doing when in fact I think there's
a lot of credibility associated with the Fed's actions.
In
particular--and I suspect to some extent, Alan, what you said was
misinterpreted in this regard--the real interest rate [issue] caught a
lot of attention. There was a sense that people would question if we
can't really control it in the long run and all we can really observe
is a proxy and we can't really observe real interest rates and we

-18-

8/17/93

don't know what at any point in time the right natural rate is, it's
very hard to view that as a target. I don't think that is what you
were suggesting. I think you were suggesting that there is
information there and that we ought to use it, and I agree with that.
But as we go through this period of thinking about what we ought to be
looking at, we ought not get too far from the basics. We ought to
focus on the tools of policy and what it is we affect--reserves, the
base, and all the aggregates related to that.
I won't say any more
about it today, but I'm struck by that chart in the weekly Board
briefings that relates the opportunity costs of M1 to its velocity and
how that has tracked--how certain periods stand out, at least to the
eye, where there have been inflection points in policy. There may be
more information in M1 than we're willing to give it credit for.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Reports from businesses, large and small, and
from banks in the Cleveland District continue to be good--better than
they previously expected--[but they are] associated with a pessimistic
outlook. There is this continuing tendency to feel that whatever good
sales volumes, good backlogs, or earnings are being experienced are
not going to be sustained. Maybe it's that people are unaccustomed in
the Fourth District to performing what they perceive as better than
other places in the country. Certainly what they read about other
parts of the country is more negative than what they're feeling in our
District. Agriculture is good; both corn and bean crops are good;
what's important is better prices and good farm incomes for the third
year in a row. So the banks in the ag regions are feeling that farm
credit is in very good shape. Land prices are firm to rising;
agricultural equipment sales are very strong both within the District
and nationally; Si Keehn commented about that. The auto supply
companies are doing quite well, though they are nervous about the
outlook. They've had a much better year than they thought they were
going to have but continue to worry about the future. Our small
communities are quite strong. A lot of the smaller cities around the
District would describe their conditions as bordering on a temporary
boom for them; there's construction of single-family housing, shopping
centers, and some government buildings. But also there is a belief
that this is temporary [and they should] enjoy it while it lasts
because [business conditions] are going to weaken in the future.
I formed a new Small Bank Advisory Council that had its first
meeting last Friday. After they had a very extensive briefing on
economic developments, including a variety of measures of inflation,
various measures of money, narrow and broad, nominal and real interest
rates, credit flows and so on, I asked them to characterize monetary
policy as they currently see it in view of the fiscal package and
local conditions and what they're seeing in their banks.
[Views] were
about evenly split between those who said that they consider policy
about right or too easy. Not a single banker was willing to
characterize it as too tight.
They consistently think inflation has
already hit its low and is going to move up. We do feel we've had
some success with both small banks and small businesses around the
District in talking them into lowering their expectations about how
much inflation is going to rise, especially as that feeds into their
plans with regard to labor--their own salary budgets and their
projections of what kind of increases they will be granting into 1994.

-19-

8/17/93

But they still
has been.

[see inflation]

in an upward direction from where it

As far as the national outlook, I don't know whether the
Greenbook forecast for inflation is a good forecast or not, but I do
think it's unacceptable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I've either been an academic all
my life or else a government employee, so I've never had the
opportunity to pay the kind of taxes that some people are going to
pay. But--I have an example that's going around the table--I get my
kicks either by buying lottery tickets when the pot gets really,
really big or else figuring taxes for people who are very well
endowed. What I'd like to do is to talk through briefly what the
first quarter is going to look like for a self-employed business
person who makes $1 million. There are roughly 50,000 of these
individuals in the country. If we reduce that to a half million
dollars, we are talking about perhaps another 180,000 people, all of
whom are in roughly this type of situation. The earnings for the
first quarter for one making $1 million a year are $250,000. What is
going to be due next April 15th are their first-quarter estimated
taxes, which under the new bill will be $92,000, and only one-third of
the retroactive tax increase. The latter is a bit less than $25,000;
the total retroactive tax increase is on the order of $74,000. And
first-quarter FICA is about $14,000.
So, the total due on April 15th
under the new tax bill will be $131,000 out of the $250,000 they will
have earned in the first quarter. Now the thing I would point out-MR. MULLINS.

What about Medicare?

MR. LINDSEY.

That's a part of the FICA.

MR. MULLINS.

I wanted to make sure you had included that.

MR. LINDSEY. In the process of the tax bill, they got this
interest-free loan provision in it so that on April 15, 1994 they
would only owe one-third of their tax increase. Had that not been the
case, these individuals would have owed roughly another $50,000 on
April 15th or another 20 percent of their first-quarter's income,
meaning that they would have been working three-fourths of the first
quarter of the year to pay their April 15th federal tax bill. There

are no state income taxes in these calculations.

Maybe the rich

really are different, but anyone who has any kind of cash flow
constraints at all and has to send 75 percent of his income to Uncle

Sam I think would probably have been in an interesting situation April
15th. I think a lot of the pressure has backed off because of that
one-third provision; it's a tiny little provision in the tax law, but
it probably is going to help the economy quite a bit in the first and
second quarters next year.
I did another calculation. Most people who go to
accountants, of course, want to keep money in their own checking
accounts and not give Uncle Sam an interest-free loan. You just have
to pay 90 percent of your tax on an estimated basis. If that's true
and you are rigorous about it, you will owe on April 15th $151,000
instead of $131,000 and that's 60 percent of your first-quarter

-20-

8/17/93

earnings.
I think these are somewhat interesting numbers; I don't
know how they're going to affect the small business sector. There is
a lot of debate about it. Again, there's no behavior here or anything
else; it's simply a cash flow issue.
My own personal anecdotal survey is that most people who are
affected by the tax bill have underestimated how much they're going to
pay. This millionaire, for example, will see federal taxes go up by
33 percent next year. Most people I've talked to figure their taxes
I think a surprise of that
are going to go up by 10 to 15 percent.
magnitude next April 15th is something that may affect the economy.
Other than that, Mr. Chairman, I think the Greenbook has it
about right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate that tax
instruction from Governor Lindsey, since I guess the date just passed
for extensions!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I have a blind trust and I'm delighted!

MR. MULLINS. The thing I've noticed on the tax return is
that box at the top where it says if you check this box $1 will go to
the presidential election campaign fund and it will not increase your
I'd like them to take the rest of my taxes from wherever they
taxes.
get that! And the other provision I think we should have is that
every Congressman should be required to fill out his or her own return
to get the flavor for it.
I think the economy has been pretty well discussed, no pun
intended. The '93 GDP has been revised down because the first half
was weak. We had a weak second quarter, a weak first half. With
growth in the first half at a rate of only a little over 1 percent,
it's difficult to be too enthusiastic about this kind of performance.
It looks a little better, maybe, if we average the fourth quarter with
the first quarter and think of that as one.
And it might look even
better, although not so much on the Greenbook forecast, if we take the
second quarter and the third quarter together, but I will withhold
judgment on that. Certainly, when we look at the second quarter more
closely, it is a more positive picture.
Spending did hold up quite
well. Despite all the talk about consumer pessimism, consumer
spending advanced at almost a 4 percent annual pace; the personal
saving rate dropped again. And we continue to hear the talk about
business pessimism concerning spending and hiring. Business fixed
investment advanced at a 13 percent annual rate in the second quarter
amid this pessimism. And payroll employment, which I continue to hear
is very weak, is running at a 2 million job pace for the year, double
the number of jobs added last year, which in my view has to provide
some measure of downside protection. Even if the jobs aren't great,
the unemployment rate is almost a percentage point lower than it was
last year at this time.
It's 6.8 percent or 6.85 percent; and exCalifornia it's 6.4 percent but I guess that's unfair. The recent
evidence on housing is a bit mixed, but on balance it suggests some
acceleration in the housing expansion. The Mortgage Bankers
Association survey of purchase mortgage applications is very positive
as are homebuilders' assessments of current sales. Even though starts

8/17/93

-21-

were down a bit this morning, permits were up a bit; and it seems to
me that for the first half of the year starts were up about 10 percent
over last year.
So, I think the hard evidence is still consistent with
moderate growth, and we've had six quarters [averaging] 2-1/2 percent.
Nonetheless, there are perhaps a few clouds on the horizon or at least
hints of haze that have appeared on the scene. The first is this auto
story. We have had a little easing in the auto sales. And I think
this is the first sign in hard spending data of perhaps something
going on. Now, there is a special story--the inventory shortage.
It's also true, as I think the staff has pointed out, that non-auto
sales seem to have picked up if we look at the control category.
I
must admit that this is an extreme form of product substitution:
If
you can't find the car you're looking for, you buy a sofa.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]

As long as it's a convertible couch!

MR. MULLINS.
I don't have to answer that! Still, I think
the auto easing may be the first sign of something going on. The
other warning sign continues-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a question about the
seasonalities in all these.
If you look at patterns, it's clear.
MR. MULLINS. Yes.
We've now had four or five consecutive
reporting periods where auto sales have backed down a bit. I think
there's enough noise going on and enough parts of the country under
water and the like to take that too seriously. But before auto sales
were a positive [factor].
People were buying cars and it was
something that refuted concern. And this, it seems to me, is the one
thing that has backed off a bit.
The other thing is that both consumer and business confidence
continue to recede on surveys. What is new in the Michigan survey is
that the decline is concentrated in consumers' assessments of current
conditions, not vague fears about expected conditions which had
propelled the earlier declines.
Now, the current conditions index is
still about 10 points above October of last year, but it had held up
pretty firmly until very recently. When I total it up I still see
self-sustaining momentum of moderate growth. And if the last six
quarters were 2-1/2 percent, it seems to me it ought to average a bit
stronger than that.
The fall in long rates should reinforce this momentum and
should cushion, if not entirely offset, the fiscal drag. Another
thing we haven't talked much about is that the deleveraging head winds
continue to diminish even to the extent that some have started to
note--and we picked this up in a number of different settings--signs
of the beginning of speculative excess in stock prices, especially the
[We've seen] very low IPO volumes, the lowest in 15
weak stocks.
years, low quality spreads on bonds, and very low spreads on junk
bonds. And all of this has occurred without the realistic prospect of
robust growth, which usually accompanies these sorts of developments.
Some people also suggest, and it may be less likely in my view, that
financial institutions' attitudes toward lending may have been easing
up a bit. We can see things like land prices starting to get a little

-22-

8/17/93

better. We talked about this yesterday at the briefing. The Chairman
pointed out that so far at least there is not a lot of evidence of net
But I would point
credit flows to fuel these speculative concerns.
out that these factors do provide coincident indicators of easier
conditions in the financial system.
With respect to inflation, I think there are two useful
perspectives:
the path of contemporaneous inflation and the mediumto longer-term outlook. With respect to contemporaneous inflation,
what a difference a meeting makes!
The last time I said the good news
was that inflation had been low two out of the past three months; now
it's four out of the past five months. As Al mentioned, the core CPI
was 2.4 percent over the past five months compared with 4.6 percent
over the previous five months.
Inflation in that 10-month period
since the end of the third quarter of last year is now 3-1/2 percent.
This pattern of acceleration and deceleration over that period of a
couple of quarters is also generally reflected in most of the broadbased inflation measures and even reflected in commodity prices,
albeit over a different timeframe as you'd expect. And I think this
is consistent with speed effects interacting with expectation effects.
Indeed, I wonder whether speed effects are inherently "expectative;"
it may not be two separate things going on there.
If this is the good
news, I think the bad news is that inflation apparently has settled
down in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range. That is somewhat higher,
perhaps 1/2 percent or so higher, than we would have expected earlier
this year; and that keeps alive this medium-term issue of the
alignment of rates.
The Chairman said nothing about targeting real interest
rates, and I would agree that they're not simply amenable to
targeting. I think looking at real rates provides a rough conceptual
framework which provides insight on some things, one could say, at the
edges of it. When you look at that issue today you still see that
rates look pretty low. The Board's staff has these simple models
suggesting that short-term real rates are 2 to 3-1/2 percent below a
neutral stance, where a neutral stance is defined as their estimate of
the equilibrium real rate. One shouldn't ask about the standard
errors!
MR. SYRON.
MR. MULLINS.
3-1/2 percent-MR. SYRON.
MR. MULLINS.
MR. SYRON.

Could you repeat that?
Yes, they estimate real rates currently 2 to
Percent?
Percentage points.
Yes, percentage points.

MR. MULLINS. --below their estimate of the equilibrium real
short-term rate, which is currently zero.
MR. SYRON.

Right.

MR. MULLINS. And they estimate the real short rate
equilibrium may be 2 to 3-1/2 percent--with a standard error of 5
[Laughter]
percentage points!

8/17/93

-23-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's a concept which is credible for
long-term real rates, which are stable. There is not one for shortterm rates.
In other words there's a cyclical characteristic-MR. MULLINS. Which has shifted it around. I would not
suggest that there's any precision here.
I think it does suggest that
by historical standards rates continue to look pretty low. With the
possibility of some net fiscal drag from the budget deal, even net of
the lower long rates, a stance on the accommodative side of neutral
seems not inappropriate. The question is how accommodative and to
what extent we might be asking for trouble down the road. Certainly,
since inflation has receded there's no evidence of harm currently--no
compelling evidence of damage yet, of building pressures of credit
flows gathering momentum even though we might have some of these
speculative excesses in financial asset pricing. Still, the absence
of currently observable pressures doesn't give me too much comfort
[given] the policy lags. We saw how quickly slack can disappear in
the second half of last year. And once the pressures are truly
observable and supported by fundamentals, it's pretty late in the
game, requiring more precipitous adjustments and risks and economic
adjustments as well.
So, looking to the medium term, I still think it's in
everyone's interest to achieve a sustainable stance, one which
supports economic growth but does not seem destined to require
substantial adjustment timed with flawless precision to avoid
instability. I think we're good, but I wonder how good we are in
timing that. We may be very, very fortunate and back into such a
decision if inflation continues to collapse. I think more likely than
not we have a bit of work ahead of us. Now, overall, I do think this
episode has been useful and quite successful. I don't know that I
would go so far as to suggest that the upturn in inflation has yielded
to the stinging lash of an asymmetric directive. That may be a little
extreme. However, I do think we've educated the markets here; one
need only read the assessments of economists and market participants
and perhaps look at the record low 30-year implied forward rates to
demonstrate that we've educated the market. It may strain credibility
to suggest we've educated the political system; I wouldn't suggest
that. We may have made some inroads there as well, though; at least
the message has been delivered. All involved seem to have a better
understanding of the Fed's attitude toward inflation, our commitment
to price stability; they understand that we do not find 3-1/2 to 4
percent inflation acceptable. Even though no shots were actually
fired, I think we laid down some useful groundwork in this episode.
I'd just close by saying that it may be a bit more tricky in
the months ahead. The upturn in inflation and our response, as Tom
mentioned, likely preempted talk and expectations of Fed ease to
offset the budget deal. With inflation now "under control" at 3-1/2
percent, a very weak first half, and a budget deal enacted in law, I
I've already heard some
feel that sort of talk is likely to emerge.
talk about monetary gridlock:
The Fed on hold for a year while the
economy inches along. While Congress and the Administration have done
their part, some may look to us now. So with the backdrop of an
already very accommodative stance in my view, looking medium term the
risk is that that may entail [difficulties] down the road. And with a
new cloud or two drifting onto the economic horizon, I safely predict
an interesting period ahead.

-24-

8/17/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.
I don't often find myself counterpoised against
Governor Mullins and I run the risk, I think, of sounding like a
broken record here, but I continue to hear the term fiscal drag around
the table. My inclination would be to change that a bit to either
fiscal anchor or maybe fiscal torpedo.
It seems to me that tax
increases of the magnitude we're talking about, which are not confined
to the wealthy--and Larry has indicated here what the effects can be
on, let's say, a subchapter S individual who has a healthy income--and
spending cuts of the magnitude we're talking about, if realized, will
displace a lot of workers for long periods of time and some perhaps
permanently. Corporate restructuring continues and I think it may be
even at an accelerated pace now and in the near future. The consumer
confidence indexes, as we've all noted, continue their downward trend.
And logic says that that set of conditions may inhibit consumer
spending, although we have not seen startling evidence of that yet.
But after all, the budget compromise is only a couple of weeks old.
And certainly there are indications that it is at least causing the
postponement of some business investment; and certainly business
hiring is being diverted into temporary types of help instead of
permanent employment.
I continue to believe that those conditions
will develop further as the full implications of the budget agreement
are realized on a broader scale. At the same time, the health care
discussions thus far seem to telegraph further costs both to
businesses and to employees. And there seems to be a growing concern
over the full implications for employment and investment inherent in
the North American Free Trade Agreement.
In that [environment], I still think the risks to the economy
are shifting toward the down side as uncertainties [abound].
We all
accept, I think, that uncertainty inevitably inhibits growth.
In that
context a more symmetrical approach to monetary policy would seem to
be logical but I'm not suggesting or recommending that simply because
I think a shift in our policy at this time could create a very
negative signal and one that might send things going in the wrong
direction. But I am convinced that we are at a juncture here where
the full implications of all of these major programs could be
inhibiting [economic growth] to a much greater extent than is
currently indicated by the data that we're looking at.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that I'm in
the consensus that I'm hearing around the table this morning. We've
been for a long time taking two steps forward and one step back and
that seems to continue. Some of the head winds we've been sailing
into are diminishing:
Real estate is beginning to stabilize; banks
are strong again and seem to want to lend; deleveraging is slowing
down. Some of the head winds continue:
The foreign economies
continue weak; defense spending continues to go down. There are
favorable and unfavorable new factors. We've had a lowering of longterm interest rates for some time, but one could call it a new factor
that it has gone into this very dynamic phase in the last several
months.
I think an important favorable factor is that the budget
fight is simply over. Never mind how it came out; it's settled. I
think that's going to help a lot.
On the negative side, of course, is
the fact that that budget deal contains some very serious taxes, as

8/17/93

-25-

we've heard here in the last few minutes. We've had some very good
news and some disappointing news. The very good news is that more and
more it seems that last winter's inflation surge was temporary. I've
now learned that the new danger I didn't know about before is called
"speed" effect. And there has been some disappointing news in the
sense that, at least in my case, I expected real economic activity to
improve more quickly and strongly than it has. So, the realities
don't seem to me to have changed much. However slowly and
torturously, the economy does continue to improve. Inflation now
seems to be trendless, albeit at much too high a level. So, for the
moment at least, I guess I would summarize by saying: Have a nice
vacation. We're going to have work to do very soon, I'm sure.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, the economy of the
Second District has weakened slightly in recent weeks and probably can
best be described as bumping along a trough. The passage of the
budget deficit bill following the military base closings in June is
likely to add further downward pressure in coming months. The labor
markets have been weak. Employment in the state of New York declined
by 14,000 jobs in June, and 51,000 jobs were shed in New Jersey. In
New York there were declines in manufacturing employment but in New
Jersey they were spread throughout the whole economy. Retail sales
have been very mixed. Some firms at the lower end of the market in
prices have been doing rather well and the firms selling higher ticket
items have been doing rather poorly. The budget bill is going to
affect the Second District fairly negatively. A lot of our neighbors,
especially those in lower Manhattan, make a great deal of money and
would fit into Governor Lindsey's explanation. In addition, the cuts
on top of the base closings in the bill especially affect New York,
New Jersey, and Connecticut. So, the rather negative tone in the area
is made somewhat worse by recent developments.
At the national level, we believe that the Greenbook forecast
is essentially right on. The only area in which we in fact agree with
the analysis but [where] I am somewhat concerned is that the strength
for the export markets seen in Japan and in Europe may be slightly
overstated. I think the political leadership in Japan is going to
concentrate almost exclusively on electoral reform and do very little
about the economy. And it's very difficult to exaggerate the degree
of political dismay
in Europe. Although I think the forecast for those economies in the
Greenbook is the best bet, if there's any risk to it, I think the risk
is that [the forecast] is overstated; and that could mean that our net
exports would be even a bit weaker. The offset is that there would be
some reduction in price pressures.
In market developments, I think it's fascinating that the
2- to 30-year spread as of the close yesterday was 235 basis points
whereas for a very long time the spread was about 3 full percentage
points. If this spread reflects inflationary expectations, we must
ask what has reduced them. It's very difficult for me to see that the
deficit reduction bill in and of itself reduced them significantly in
the recent past. There certainly was at least in some quarters a
breath of relief that the perils of Pauline had ended and the lady had
been rescued from the railroad track and that the bill had passed.
But the economic effects of the bill had been largely discounted. I

-26-

8/17/93

believe quite firmly that the reduction in the spread has come from
two factors:
One, the general expectation that economic growth will
be moderate; but perhaps more importantly the move to an asymmetric
directive on the part of this Committee and the recent HumphreyHawkins testimony. Even though we had a hiccup in rates after both
events hit the news, once the market absorbed the significance of the
actions of this Committee I think there has been a positive effect on
the level of interest rates and on the yield curve and that we have
had a very useful educational effect on inflationary expectations.
Such expectations are essentially psychological and the fact that an
asymmetric directive and the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony are also
largely psychological has in my view been a very important and
constructive offsetting effect. We've done some work at the New York
Bank on the comparison between real interest rates at the present time
and at a similar point in history, which was August of 1977. At that
[earlier] time the real fed funds rate was zero or, if one wants to be
exact, -0.2 percent.
But other real interest rates were considerably
lower. Although the core inflation rate at the time was 6.2 percent,
the average prime rate for the month was 6.8 percent. Now, we have a
core inflation rate of, let's say, 3.3 percent with the prime rate at
6 percent. And as you go out further on the yield curve, the real
interest rates at the present time are considerably higher than they
were then. That, I think, has two effects.
One, it contributes to an
explanation on top of the feel of both households and corporations
that they should restructure their balance sheets. They have to note
that the effect of taking on debt is quite expensive in real terms,
and that would be another factor in the relatively slow growth. On
the other hand, it still indicates that inflationary expectations are
a great deal higher than I believe this Committee should find
acceptable or satisfactory. So if there is some educational effort
that we've been engaged in--and rather successfully in recent months-it would indicate that there are some educational efforts still lying
ahead of us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Well, I think I'm about in the middle here; we
certainly are seeing slow or moderate growth no matter how we slice
it. The labor market is seeing some improvement, but really only
slightly more than handling the demographics. And the quality of much
of that job growth has not been that good. Restructuring is clearly
continuing. Consumer confidence, I think, is taking its toll. We're
seeing hesitant consumers and the confidence problems spreading to the
business sector with hesitance in some investment patterns. As for
potential home owners, we've not seen as much growth in the housing
sector as I think the fundamentals would suggest. Weak international
trading partners, the defense downsizing, the deficits--federal and
state--are going to continue to be a drag. We haven't talked as much
around the table today about the state deficit problems, but we may be
hearing more about that in the upcoming quarter. Then, of course,
there's the realization of the budget package now that it has been
passed. As Larry has demonstrated, people are now really going to be
understanding what that tax package meant. And, of course, we still
have to work through the flood problems and we still have health care
on the horizon. So, a lot of these factors are contributing to the
outlook for slow growth.

8/17/93

-27-

Now, having said that, we shouldn't forget or miss that there
are some strengths in the economy that could bode well for the long
run. The financial markets are really reasonably strong:
The equity
market is strong; the bond market is strong. Banks are in better
shape and individual balance sheets are in better shape. There is at
least a focus on trying to solve the deficit problem. I can't say
that I'm all that confident that the current package is the thing
that's going to solve it, but at least there seems to be a focus on
the fact that something needs to be done about it.
We do have a number of anomalies that I think we're going to
have to address over the coming months. There is this question of
productivity. I haven't heard it mentioned today, but the fall-off in
productivity in the first half of this year seems anomalous to me,
given all of the downsizing and the focus on efficiency. I don't know
if this is a bad harbinger or if it's going to go away. The
persistence of low real interest rates, at least short-term real
interest rates, doesn't seem like something that can continue forever.
That can't be a stable situation. The weakness of the dollar is
another anomalous situation. Certainly M2 remains another anomaly.
I, like Tom, am a bit uncomfortable that we don't have a clear focus
for monetary policy. So, I hope that we will continue to work our way
toward trying to define what is happening to M2 and how long these
temporary factors are going to be temporary. Maybe inflation fits
into the category of an anomaly. I've certainly been more encouraged
by the recent news--the fact that in this most recent inflation report
the last 12-month core inflation number is lower than the previous
12-month number. So, there is still a possibility of making some
progress, but we shouldn't think that the progress is going to be
anywhere near as good as it has been in the last year or so.
I don't
see the possibility of a big outbreak of inflation. The usual indicia
are simply not present:
We don't see an overheated economy; cost-push
pressures aren't significant, if you look at the slack in labor
markets; we're not importing inflation; people aren't rushing to
convert to real assets.
So, I'm a little more encouraged on
inflation. But, again, if we in fact are settling into this 3 to
3-1/2 percent range, we can't be satisfied with that. So, we may
still have some work ahead of us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. In the global economy, prices and interest rates
do adjust depending upon conditions that exist throughout the entire
world market. The one price that doesn't really move based upon
global economic conditions is the fed funds rate because we at the
Federal Reserve decide exactly what it will be. And the question can
be whether or not the rate that's chosen is in equilibrium with other
rates throughout the global market system. Six months ago it did
appear quite likely that the rate of inflation for [1993] would be
just exactly where it appears it is today. I think those of us that
made [forecasts] around that median for the group of about 3.2 percent
inflation [thought] that didn't look too bad then [and it] doesn't
look too bad now. I never believed at the worst of the conditions in
March that the rate of inflation for [1993] was going to accelerate.
It just seemed to me that we were in a circumstance in which global
forces were somewhat favorable in regard to a decelerating inflation
rate in the United States and that the United States in [1993] should
have been poised for a continued disinflation. I thought that we

8/17/93

-28-

should have ended up in [1993], conditions being ideal, with an
inflation rate around 2-1/2 percent December-over-December. That has
not happened and we now find ourselves in a position where, unlike
March and May and maybe even July, it just would not make any sense
for us to make an immediate change in the fed funds rate given the
market conditions as they are today.
Certainly, I would agree with Al Broaddus and Bill McDonough
and others who expressed the view that our posturing, particularly
summarized by the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, has indeed
worked very well for those of us who have a pragmatic inclination.
That is, look at the bond market and see what has happened. It has
really been an ideal arrangement, one which I think all of us have
been concerned about as we brought rates down during the recession and
slow recovery period. The reason we wanted to be slow in bringing
rates down is because we understood that bringing rates down as fast
as the market wanted would give us adverse effects on long-term and
intermediate interest rates, and recovery would be slower rather than
So, I think it is always good news when things work out
faster.
better than one might have expected. I think that posturing was
beneficial and I share Bill McDonough's view that if it's not broke,
maybe we ought not try to fix it.
But I do believe that there are some out-of-equilibrium risks
that exist for us and that we ought to be conscious of them as we go
forward. First of all, most of our studies of commodity prices show
very clearly that the true pass-through effects in regard to the CPI
and the PPI were clearly driven by oil; that is, using U.S.
consumption weights to determine the right weighting on commodity
prices gives us something like a 55 percent weight on oil prices on
our commodity experimental index. Not all is due to monetary policy;
we're in a favorable period in regard to oil prices and that provides
a wonderful window for possible further disinflation. That window may
not be open forever; just as oil prices sometimes get down toward the
$16 or $15 range, we've noticed they tend to shift back up. So the
prospects of somewhat higher oil prices could be somewhat upsetting in
regard to future inflation, but I don't think that exists for the
remainder of [1993].
Another probably more immediate worrisome outof-equilibrium condition would be seen particularly in the dramatic
change in the exchange value of the yen versus the dollar over the
last year. Think about a 20 percent appreciation of the yen. It's
sort of like when [a team] gets down to the final four:
It doesn't
make much difference how well it performed against the also-rans; it
doesn't make much difference how it performed in December when it was
playing those state colleges that almost paid money to come and play
at your university. We are in competition, of course, with the
Japanese yen as a reserve currency. We certainly lead the way in that
regard. But if we take the G-3 countries plus Switzerland and look at
their PPIs year-over-year, all of these countries but the United
States have negative PPIs year-over-year. That is, Germany's PPI is
lower than it was 12 months ago; Japan's PPI is lower than it was 12
months ago; Switzerland's PPI is about exactly where it was 12 months
ago; and our PPI--I didn't look recently but I assume--is around 1.3
So there are some
percentage points higher than a year ago.
questions. And it seems to me that if there's any kind of edge of a
cliff, it's the edge of a cliff in regard to the prospect for the
soundness of the dollar versus the yen whereby the world not only
doesn't know what the price of yen in terms of dollars might be next

-29-

8/17/93

month but many might say,
the future, that there is
favor being in yen assets
short-term interest rates
that expectation and that

if asked what it would be 5 or 10 years in
a general expectation that the rate might
versus being in dollar assets. Clearly our
do not provide reasonable compensation for
kind of change.

Productivity has been a real puzzle for me. Clearly, if your
forecast gets really thrown awry you say it's a puzzle; and part of my
real economic forecast for [1993] has certainly missed the mark. I
really just don't understand productivity. I don't understand how we
can have a decline in productivity for the business sector of 1-1/2
and 2-1/2 percent two quarters in a row when productivity in
manufacturing has been rising at 4-1/2 to 5 percent! Somebody really
is doing very, very poorly; and if anyone knows who it is--who is
really snuffing on the job--they haven't been spotted yet.
So, that
is indeed a real puzzle.
Over time, the battle against inflation is sometimes a battle
of technology; whether technology will keep up is a question in the
very, very expanding world. I [don't] want to sound too Malthusian
because Malthus I think forgot or did not really understand how
equilibrium price adjustments can take place to forestall what he
would call such dismal outcomes. But when we noticed that the world's
oceans finally produced less fish last year than they did the previous
year, we knew something was going on. We have a lot of technology in
regard to harvesting fish and that technology has been used by a lot
of people. And it has interested me to note that fish prices of some
of the good fish catches--I mean cod, salmon, and so forth--are
relatively high at the grocery store. And yet I thought it was
interesting to note that the value of all the fish harvested in the
world was less than the cost of production, which is a rather
interesting phenomenon. This doesn't tell us that we're going to run
out of fish because we do know that aquaculture and other techniques
will enable us to provide the demand that's there. But we will not do
it at the same price that is occurring when we're doing some
harvesting. I noticed that with all the attention paid to the floods
in the Mississippi Valley and the entire region, there has been a lot
of talk about corn production and soybean production, which I think is
probably a pretty minor event, but very little talk about all that
soil that went down the river.
Now, over the years as China enters [the global economy] and
continues double-digit economic growth with a billion people and as
the world makes more and more demands upon resources, we will have an
adverse inflationary environment to look at in the long haul. And we
have pegged the fed funds rate at a level that can't be changed right
now, but it does need to be changed. Since we missed the March and
May opportunities to get that rate up, I think we do want to be fully
conscious of the opportunity whenever forces are such that we can get
the rate closer to what I think the Chairman indicated would be more
of an equilibrium rate; we ought to be ready to do that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

We now adjourn for coffee.

[Coffee break]
MR. KOHN. I thought I would start my briefing with some
thoughts on this topic using it to lead into the discussion of current

8/17/93

-30-

policy options. Those of you attending the Jackson Hole conference
will note some similarity between the first two pages today and what
you will hear on Friday. It's called "Economies of Scope."
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Don?

MR. SYRON. Don, I have a question that has to do with
timing. Even if one thought the probability was greater that the next
move would be up rather than down, what is the longest that we've had
an asymmetric directive in one direction and not acted on it?
MR. KOHN.
I don't know the answer.
MR. SYRON.

Have we ever had one for five or six months?

MR. KOHN. We've had very few periods of five or six months
where we haven't [moved] the federal funds rate. We had a period from
September through December of last year in which we had asymmetry
toward ease and didn't move. Our last move was right after Labor Day
last year. We continued to be asymmetrical toward ease and didn't
move over the ensuing months.
Then we were neutral for several months
and didn't ease. And, obviously, we've been asymmetrical toward
tightening for two months and didn't tighten. We looked some time
ago--I guess it was before the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony-at periods of unchanged federal funds rates. We found a few of five
or six months, but not too many. And I don't remember what the
directives were in those times. My guess is that they were probably
not biased rather than asymmetrical, but I don't know that for a fact.
MR. SYRON. Can I just follow up?
I haven't looked at the
data, which is what one needs to do, but how unusual would it be to
have a period in which we went asymmetric in one direction or the
other, then reversed and went back to symmetry, and then went back to
that asymmetry?
MR. KOHN. It has happened from time to time, but it is
unusual. We did look at that. We actually looked before the last
FOMC meeting for one-month switches and I think we found one or two.
MR. MULLINS.

We did it last year.

MR. KOHN. They were sometimes associated with things like
stock markets [or other] external events.
MR. MULLINS.
We did it in '92, maybe in May; we went
symmetric for a time after being asymmetric.
MR. KOHN.

That was the one.

MR. MULLINS. Yes, and then once the second-quarter [data]
came in and unemployment went to 7.8 percent we went symmetric.
MR. KOHN. So, there are a few examples like that;
rare but it does happen.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

they are

-31-

8/17/93

MR. MULLINS. Just a technical point. In your discussion of
real long rates, you were not talking about the nominal rate minus the
observed inflation rate, correct?
MR. KOHN. In theory, obviously, it's the nominal rate minus
the expected inflation rate over the period.
MR. MULLINS.

Over that 30-year period!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The full maturity.

MR. KOHN. Presumably, in theory you'd want something that
has the same duration.
MR. MULLINS. Yes, it has to be the same duration. So, what
we're talking about is something that is completely and entirely
unobservable?
MR. KOHN.

Yes, we have these surveys but--

MR. MULLINS.
It's tough to go out 30 years in a survey!
There is a routine just to take the long rates and subtract off the
current inflation rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is the constant dollar value of the

coupon.
MR. MULLINS.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Which is a different concept.

MR. MULLINS. Yes, it means something. Some people use that
as the real rate and it is important to keep that straight.
So, given
that recent inflation has been about 3 to 3-1/2 percent and certainly
the average over the past 10 years has been 4-1/2 percent or so and
the average over 20 years is worse than that, probably embedded in the
30-year rate is an expectation higher than the current inflation.
MR. KOHN.
I would think so, yes. Now, the Philadelphia Fed
does surveys and I think they have about 3-7/8ths in the most recent
one; that's several months old. The Michigan surveys are closer to 5
percent.
MR. MULLINS.
MR. KOHN.

Yes, they're 5-year maturities.

I don't know what they ask for--about 5 to 10

years.
MR. MULLINS.

And the guy who is now at Dreyfus--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

does it.

Hoey.

He doesn't do

[a survey]

anymore?

MR. PRELL. A fellow named Hotchkis, his former colleague,
It's a little below 4 percent.
MR. MULLINS.

That's 10 years?

8/17/93

-32-

MR. PRELL. Well, there's a 5-year and a 10-year rate; they
are both in the same ball park.
MR. MULLINS. We have no CPI link, bond, or instrument that
we could [use to] back out the implied-MR. KOHN.

Not that I'm aware of.

MR. MULLINS.

Okay.

MR. MULLINS. Thank you.
MR. ANGELL.
Don, I guess I always thought an asymmetric
directive could [mean] two things. One is an indication that the
Committee in the intermeeting period wants the Chairman to be alert to
a possible move in one direction only. But I presume there's also
another aspect of it and that is that with an asymmetric directive the
Chairman wouldn't feel very comfortable, unless there was a very
unusual circumstance, moving rates the other way without a conference
call; that would not seem to be appropriate. I didn't hear anyone
today talk about the need to lower rates during this intermeeting
period. What I'm wondering is, if we went to a symmetric directive,
whether there is any likelihood that rates would really be lower
without a telephone conference call.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
intermeeting period.
MR. ANGELL.

If we went to symmetric you say?

Remember that this is a relatively short

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My suspicion is that something that
would require us to move rates in this period would be such a
startling event that I think we'd want to speak-MR. ANGELL.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
is going on.

--just to

[consult]

each other on what

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I think there is a question about
what asymmetry means. May I just ask Bill or the market people:
What
is the market perception of what asymmetry means?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think historically--Joan, correct
me if I'm wrong--it has been that there would be, if not a likelihood,
a distinct possibility of an actual move in the intermeeting period.
MR. SYRON.

In the intermeeting period.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Rather than a signal of
[unintelligible].
Is that right, Joan?
MS. LOVETT.

A predisposition.

8/17/93

-33-

MR. KOHN. But I think it shows that you're more ready to go
in one direction or another.
MR. SYRON.

In the intermeeting period.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. I was going to say this later but perhaps now
is the point to interject [my comment], given what has been touched on
here. What is the purpose of the directive?
In its narrowest sense
we just heard that it is viewed by the market, and I think by some of
us, as the [pre]disposition of the Committee to move within the
intermeeting period. If there's no likelihood that we're planning to
move one way or the other, the logic would suggest to me that the
directive should be symmetric. If there is a different message to be
conveyed by the directive--that in the longer term, beyond the
intermeeting period, we're suggesting to the markets that the next
move will probably be a move one way or the other--then an asymmetric
directive I think is appropriate. If there's still a further longerterm message to be conveyed by the directive--that is, that the
central bank is committed to price stability--then we should always
have an asymmetric directive in favor of tightening.
MR. ANGELL.

That's a good idea!

[Laughter]

MR. FORRESTAL. Before we decide on whether we're going to
have a symmetric or an asymmetric directive, it might be interesting
to focus on what really is the purpose of [the reference to symmetry
or asymmetry in] the directive. Again, in that narrow sense, which is
how the market interprets it, it conveys what it is likely that we
will do between now and September 21st. If that's the real
interpretation, then it should be symmetric it seems to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
questions to Don Kohn?

Well, may I suggest that these are

MR. HOENIG. May I ask Don this question?
[Laughter]
If we
leave it asymmetric for a long period of time and do nothing, do we
not give away credibility with that kind of directive?
MR. KOHN. Well, if people think you're using it to posture
rather than to take action, I think there's a little danger of that.
But it seems to me the Committee needs to think about what its posture
really is here. Is it more ready to move one way or another? Whether
you move or not, that's what you're signalling with this.
These are
instructions to the Desk and the Chairman about how you would like to
react to completely unexpected developments in the intermeeting
period.
MR. PARRY.

Coming back to Bob's question--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're getting into policy discussion
and that's out of order at this moment.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Technical questions to clarify the
position of Don Kohn? Any further questions of fact or interpretation

8/17/93

-34-

If not, let me
of what was perfectly clear on the part of Don Kohn?
start off because I'm going to be getting into exactly that question;
let's do it a little more formally. Let me just say that I don't have
terribly much to say about the economy as such. I think it's moving
along moderately. I think our diagnosis of the forces driving the
economy has been reasonably on the mark. Some numbers have not been
exactly right, but they never are, and that's not really the relevant
question. Qualitatively, I think we've understood that basically what
we are dealing with is an economy confronted with balance sheet
problems, problems of excess debt from an earlier period as asset
values declined. And we basically were confronted with a situation in
which we very consciously brought the federal funds rate down to
levels below those we could expect to be maintained indefinitely into
the future. We brought the rate down to 3 percent a year ago on the
expectation that the economy would evolve essentially in the way that
it has evolved. As a consequence of that, we have chosen not to
change policy. In other words, the presumption is that we got it
right a year ago and we've chosen to stay pretty much where we are.
The concern that we were running into, which one could very readily
capture in discussions of this Committee, is that we would fall behind
the curve when we had to tighten policy; there was a latent concern
that we would lock ourselves in and not move. The presumption that at
some point we'd have to move the funds rate up as the economy
continued to expand I think was fairly pervasive around this table.
The only question that we kept asking ourselves was when.
Above all, I'd say the general philosophy of this Committee
has been that, whatever we do, allowing something of the nature of
what occurred in the 1970s and the early 1980s [to happen again] would
be a real tragedy.
[We felt] it was essential that we focus on being
ahead of the curve [in anticipating inflation] just as we all
considered that it wasn't all that terribly important to be ahead of
the curve on the down side.
In other words, this issue of price
stability sometimes requires a different type of intermediate-term
asymmetry, where we try to be lagging somewhat on the down side but
ahead on the up side to offset the bias in our economic system. That
bias is very clearly in an inflationary direction.
With our asymmetric directives early this year and with the
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, I think we ought to be reasonably pleased
that we have altered the view of the markets such that the presumption
that we will do too little too late on the up side has changed. One
doesn't have to go back very far to read as a fairly general view that
we would be behind the curve and that that would allow inflationary
pressures to reemerge. Whatever one may say about the last several
weeks, that issue has not come up.
It's dead. We have changed the
perception of the way the markets are functioning and we have
essentially prepped them for an eventual rise in interest rates.
I
was interested as to the way the market would react to this posture
that we took.
It is very hard to argue that if the central bank takes
a position that we are going to be vigilant on inflation that [such a
position] would make long-term rates go up. Now, the answer is that
it does happen, and for a very interesting reason. Clearly, inflation
expectations cannot be perceived as going up, or else we've literally
missed the mark. But what clearly has happened--and we've observed
this recently on several different occasions with our asymmetric
directive, with my testimony, and the like--is that we saw what the
Vice Chairman called a hiccup. It is interesting to ask what that is

8/17/93

-35-

because I think it's important for us to understand what the markets
are doing. If we eliminate the notion that what we have is [rising]
inflation expectations, we are therefore led to conclude that what is
going up is real long-term interest rates. And the question is why.
Obviously, nothing fundamental has changed in the economy, so
it has to be something of an expectational variable. And the reason
I'm certain is that what we are looking at is something we've all
perceived all of our lives:
namely, that whenever there is a major
element of uncertainty, or more exactly a diminution in the state of
knowledge, the position of a human being is to withdraw. As a
consequence, whenever one is dealing with any type of asset in which
there was a net long position, the creation of uncertainty--meaning
the reduction in the state of knowledge of what is going on in the
world--leads to a pulling back, a disengaging, which means "sell."
That has nothing to do with the type of asset or what it's long-term
future is.
It is not a change in the state of knowledge; it is not an
effort to move toward improved liquidity or toward safety. Those are
I'm
rational concepts which are made on the basis of knowledge.
talking about the proposition in which knowledge is diminished and
uncertainty in the true sense of the word occurs.
If that is in fact
the case, what we would expect to occur under those conditions is
effectively the type of hiccup that we're talking about: namely, it
has to be a temporary affair because it cannot last very long. So,
however one reads these events, they are clearly consistent with that
phenomenon. But it's important for us to recognize that the
presumption that we can go out and basically argue that we are going
to suppress inflation and that, therefore, long-term real rates will
go down or long-term nominal rates will go down, I think is a
misperception and clearly one which is not supported by the data.
But
that is not to say that there's something unexplainable here. If
long-term rates went up and stayed there, then we would be looking at
a different phenomenon. But I don't think that's what this particular
proposition was.
In any event, this whole period, as a number of you have
noted, very clearly indicates that we should be quite pleased at the
way everything has come out. That is, we are essentially in a policy
position that we haven't changed for a year. That is another way of
saying to ourselves, rightly or wrongly, that we think we got it
right. And I believe the markets think we got it right. The fact
that the stock market has moved the way it has, the fact that yield
spreads have come down, as Governor Mullins indicated, the fact that
long-term rates have moved appreciably lower suggest that all the
[properties] that are related to monetary policy are behaving in a
positive manner. One thing that is not is the rate of real growth,
which is essentially [a result] of balance sheet restraint and repair,
a process we have been observing for quite a long period of time.
I conclude from all of this--and this gets to the question of
what we mean by asymmetry--that we can afford at this stage to move
back to symmetry provided two things. One is that we are doing it on
the basis that we are encouraged by the inflationary data we have seen
and that, therefore, the [prospect] of having to respond to adverse
inflationary information has lessened. But more important is that we
reemphasize our longer-term views that this is not a change in our
policy, that indeed we still expect that at some point short-term real
rates will have to move higher. As a consequence of that, I'd say

8/17/93

-36-

that we have moved tactically, not strategically. Frankly, the reason
I feel somewhat more comfortable with symmetric--although obviously I
could readily be convinced that asymmetric is not a bad position to be
in for a lot of reasons, especially those that Don Kohn raised--is my
suspicion that we may have to sit where we are now for a number of
months. And I'm concerned about the credibility of the Federal Open
Market Committee sitting with an asymmetric directive time and time
again when the purpose of that is essentially to signal an
intermediate trend--a philosophy and a strategy, not a set of tactics.
And while there was no way for us to convey what we have conveyed in a
manner other than the way we have done it, I think having done it--and
in my judgment having succeeded--we effectively can move forward and
go to a symmetric directive. The argument for going to symmetric now
is that if we don't do it now and the economy continues doing what
it's been doing, we run into the tar baby effect.
When then do we do
it?
In the same sense that I was concerned that we would get
ourselves locked in at a 3 percent federal funds rate when the
[inflation] pressures require us to move higher, I'm also concerned
that we'd get locked into an asymmetric directive, which we would have
great difficulty changing. We can change it now because the data are
very encouraging and we can lock in.
If we don't change it now, the
rationale of going back to symmetric at a later time will have to be
because we perceive the economy to be weakening, and that would
involve a wholly different type of reaction on our part.
If that were
to happen, that would mean a different set of policies; that might
even change the sense of where we are strategically because that is
not implicit in the basic path on which we're going.
So, let me just say that I think the issues that are being
raised here about the meaning of the directive are very crucial. And
very importantly, while I don't sense the slightest indication of a
desire on the part of anybody here that we should move and literally
change the funds rate in the period immediately ahead, I think how we
convey our posture at this particular stage will determine whether we
in a sense harvest in an effective manner what is a very significant
amount of central bank credibility or whether we create difficult
problems for ourselves by sending confusing signals. So, as you can
well imagine, while I'm inclined to go to symmetry, I recognize that
there are arguments to maintain asymmetry. That is not, as I said, an
uncredible position. But I'd like to hear arguments against the
symmetry position if that's the position that the Committee itself
thinks is a more viable one. Governor Mullins.
MR. MULLINS. Well, first on the rate response, I think it's
not all that clear that the market is responding negatively to the
Our staff did an analysis of nine
information, even short term.
information releases, and I think they proved that when evidence is
released in the market that the Fed is likely to raise the federal
funds rate, short-term rates go up. This astounding result was
[unintelligible] and it has proved conclusive.
It's less clear what
happens to long rates with these nine events, especially if we look at
the forward rates. So I think we might take a look at that and not
read the summary of it because the way I see it 10-year forward rates
7 days after were off 10 basis points. And the 1-year forward rate
was up 12 basis points. Now, I know they're declining rates.
It's
also biased by one or two events. But I think that question is a bit
up in the air.

-37-

8/17/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, they did do a study in the other
direction, when rates were going up. They looked at the extent to
which the long end of the market came down when we raised the discount
rate.
MR. MULLINS.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And I think we saw similar sorts of
ambiguities then. In theory, if we move in a restrictive direction we
would expect long-term rates to fall, or more exactly the forward
rates to fall.
MR. MULLINS. Well, it's not clear to me that you'd expect
that because you are reducing long-term inflation expectations but you
might be increasing the long-term real rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. How would you be increasing them other
than the risk [unintelligible] issue that I was raising?
MR. MULLINS.

Don, how do we do that?

[Laughter]

MR. KOHN. It depends on whether you're talking about the
forward rates 10 years out or the 30-year rate, which is heavily
weighted by intermediate rates. If the markets perceive us as running
a tighter policy for a time, that can raise real rates-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

For 10 years?

MR. KOHN. Well, it's going to tend to raise the forward
rates out a few years, I think. And then the question is:
What are
the weights of those in the 10-year security or the 30-year security?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

But I think that's what is happening

here.
MR. KOHN.

Yes.

MR. MULLINS. You're right, but it should come down. It is
not apparent to me that one would necessarily see that in the
instantaneous response of traders, with all due respect to traders.
It may depend more on their inventory positions. This is worthy of
study. The best information comes out early [unintelligible]
releases. Once you get expectations and people leaning, all you're
talking about is differences in what happens versus what people
anticipated would happen.
MR. MELZER. Just on that point about the behavior of
traders:
It seems to me that if they actually see the Fed moving,
they could conclude from prior experience that the Fed may be late and
that it implies the potential of higher actual inflation and maybe an
economy that's stronger than they perceived and, therefore, higher
real rates than they thought the market was discounting.
MR. MULLINS. You also get the other sort of signalling
effect, that this suggests that the economy is stronger.
MR. MELZER.

Right.

8/17/93

-38-

MR. MULLINS. Particularly in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony,
some people concluded that this was the first time policymakers in
Washington had admitted that we were not on the edge of an abyss,
holding our breath that at any time this growth could fall away.
Anyway, that's an interesting topic. We had the same thing on the
other side:
If we are that concerned [and] cutting rates, doesn't
that mean things are really weak?
MR. MELZER.

Yes.

MR. MULLINS. The bottom line is that I, too, prefer
returning to symmetric at this time.
In my view there's no question,
though, that the probability we will tighten in the intermeeting
period is greater than the probability we will ease in that period.
It comes out to two epsilons versus one epsilon! Unfortunately,
neither probability rises to the absolute threshold that warrants an
asymmetric directive in my view. If we went asymmetric it would be
purely cosmetic. For me the last two asymmetric directives have not
been cosmetic, the last one in particular. With two months of CPI and
PPI and the ECI and the other quarterly data to be published during
that intermeeting period, if the bulk of that data had come in very
disappointing, it would have been a compelling case in my view for a
move. I don't feel the same way this time. As a rule, I don't like
cosmetic directives and in general do not favor trying to jawbone
markets. I think directives should reflect an accurate portrayal of
our assessment of the situation and of the probability we are going to
find it necessary to move in the intermeeting period. So, I agree
that we should declare victory, at least temporarily.
I do see two problems.
The first is this feeling that we are
asymmetric medium term. But that's not what the [operational
paragraph of the] directive is about. The second problem is that this
could be viewed as a negative signal, as Governor LaWare noted.
Indeed with a weak first half, the budget deal, and no inflation
problem--officially now--some will choose to portray the move to
symmetry as renewed concern about deterioration in the economy. I'll
also make a wild prediction that before long there will be talk of the
need to ease, to do our part as part of this process. I think it's a
bit tricky.
I agree that how we portray this is important; [it should
be portrayed] as a response to a deceleration of inflation which has
reduced the possibility that we're going to have to move in the
intermeeting period. I would say that it's important [to do that]
without backing away from the groundwork we've laid concerning the
importance of continued disinflation. So, while I still have this
viewpoint over the longer term, I do agree that the appropriate stance
today is to return to symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I think you're right that the
shelf life of an asymmetric directive has been reached. It's clear
that the previous bias has been beneficial to our credibility. The
red alert served us well. We may have stared down inflation with that
bias. But we've now had three consecutive months of favorable
inflation news, and the information for two of those months has come
in since our last meeting. It's time to restore a symmetrical stance.
We have a large retroactive tax increase that has a lot of people
scrambling. The thing that I disagree with Governor Lindsey on his

-39-

8/17/93

arithmetic is his view that people are going to wait until April 15th
to act.
I think they're out there doing it right now and it's going
to weaken the economy, and it's going to do it before next April 15th.
If we wait and keep our asymmetric directive, we're going to get more
political pressure. And we won't want to appear to be caving in to
it. We're better off to move back to a symmetric directive in this
window of opportunity when, as you say, we come down on the basis of
[unintelligible] as well as the tax hikes. That bites the economy
hard.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Well, I preferred a symmetric directive even
last time. As I said in my comments earlier, I think under ordinary
circumstances conditions would dictate a symmetric directive at this
point.
I still am concerned that if we give the impression that we
have abandoned our determination to seek stable prices, we either
signal a weakening in the economy that is more than is perceived
elsewhere or we set off inflationary expectations again because they
think we're backing away from our position of pursuing [price
stability].
On the other hand, the arguments that have been presented
here for, as Bob McTeer calls it, the "shelf life" of the asymmetric
directive I think are persuasive, so I'm prepared to back "B"
symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, the substance of this issue of what
we're likely to do has been talked about. I think we've been very,
very successful on this. But there's a real danger in any
organization if we try to calibrate the cosmetics too closely. This
is not a simple decision, but at the end of the day the thing that
strikes me is that we spend a lot of time at this table talking about
the role of the central bank and how we communicate to the public and
to markets as a whole and about the importance of being honest in the
way we communicate. And if the perception of the markets is that our
directive does not refer to our longer-term strategy but to what we're
doing in the relatively short term, I think it's plain that it's
intentionally disingenuous and damaging to the institution to be out
there saying that we're leaning toward doing something that we're not
likely to do in the next four, six, or eight weeks.
MR. MELZER.

So where do you come out?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Laughter]

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Well, I may have a minority view here, Mr.
Chairman.
I agreed with everything you said until you got to the last
part. I would favor pretty strongly sticking with an asymmetric
directive. The latest inflation data are encouraging--no doubt about
it--but I think it's possible to overstate the progress. We always
play a bit of the numbers game here with respect to [the base for] the
calculation. But if I've calculated it right, the core CPI rate on an
annualized basis over the first seven or eight months of this year is
3.3 percent compared to 3.4 percent last year. So, the progress has
not been excessive, it seems to me, with respect to last year. Also,
as you pointed out in your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, there is at
least some evidence from survey data that inflation expectations in

-40-

8/17/93

some quarters may actually have worsened. So, while I think we've
made some gains on credibility, we still have some distance to go
before we really convince the markets and the public generally that we
are going to go all the way this time to price stability. Also, I
would make this point:
I think precisely because we have not moved
the funds rate at all for a long period of time, the directive
If we shift back to symmetry at
language is now a very big signal.
this stage of the game, it's going to get a lot of attention and
involve some risk. So, from my own standpoint I'd rather stay with
the asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, back in 1965 George Aiken, the
Senator from Vermont, recommended that we declare victory and get out
It applies
of Vietnam. I always thought that was a wise judgment.
today. First of all, I think the reason we should get out of the
asymmetric directive is to reload because we are going to have to
fight another day. That goes without saying. But I think the other
part of what Aiken recommended--that we declare victory--is also very
important.
I am somewhat concerned about what Governor Mullins
indicated:
that some will take our move as a signal on the budget
vote. But actually what we're doing is that we had a very, very well
planned--it's almost miraculous how well it worked--shift in the
nuance of policy, which I thought conveyed very well to the markets
what we believed. It led businessmen, instead of talking about
inflation, to come back saying:
"We tried to raise prices and we
couldn't."
I think it really has changed expectations out there. We
should let the world know that we've done it right and that's why
we're doing it. And by the way, declaring victory is part of making
So, I'll go
it easier for us to reload the next time when we have to.
with what George Aiken said 20 or more years ago and vote to go
symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that
the most important thing is that our policy should promote price
stability. So I think it's terribly important, whatever the
conclusion, that the minutes of this meeting reflect that ongoing view
and that public statements, especially by the Chairman but also by the
rest of us when we make them, make quite clear our commitment to price
stability. Between now and the next meeting I think it's highly
unlikely that we will change the fed funds rate.
So, then we come
down to the purpose of the [symmetry in the] directive. And at the
present time I think the market is quite well prepared to believe that
we have not changed the directive from a tactical tool to a policy
statement, and we are much better off to leave the market with that
perception. Perhaps at an appropriate time in one of your speeches or
in testimony you might include that remark. Since I think it's highly
unlikely that we would in fact change the fed funds rate before the
next meeting, I believe we should avoid shifting the signalling device
of the directive to a policy statement. And since I don't think we
should do that, to stay asymmetric would put us in the position of
doing some empty posturing, which is always extremely injurious to the
credibility of any institution and especially to one whose credibility
is so important. Therefore, I agree with your recommendation that we
go to "B" symmetric.

-41-

8/17/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your formulation
for policy, particularly the symmetric part, because I believe as do
others that this is something that should be viewed as what likely
will happen during the intermeeting period. So, I'm for alternative
"B" symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

I support

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

"B" symmetric.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I also support "B" symmetric. I think the
economy has been weaker than we previously thought. Inflation is
better and we could declare victory. Staying with asymmetry toward
tightening may in fact signal more fears about inflation than might be
necessary. Doing it now would get us ahead of the curve so that we're
not seen as switching under pressure. I would like to see messages
either in your testimony or in the minutes continuing to point toward
our emphasis on price stability.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I think the risks to the forecast
in the intermeeting period are clearly balanced so, therefore, I would
prefer a move toward symmetry.
I do think it is important that that
not be misinterpreted, and I would assume that we certainly can make
that point clear in the minutes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I completely agree with the
position you've developed. The opening line of the operational
paragraph does say "In the implementation of policy for the immediate
future" and it does seem to me that in the immediate future the
chances that we would we change our policy at all are very remote.
Therefore, I think symmetric language is appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
I'm concerned that the Committee is becoming a
little over-attentive to symmetry versus asymmetry. Certainly, in
May, as you know, the fact that we went to an asymmetric directive
didn't convince me that [it was an appropriate alternative to]
increased rates. And if we continue to battle over symmetry and
asymmetry, then we're back in the day and age in which the Committee
groaned and moaned over an eighth of a point change in the fed funds
rate, a change that really didn't amount to much. So, the issue of
symmetry and asymmetry is not very great, given the Chairman's
statement that he does expect us to be in an asymmetric mode in the
long run. That is certainly more appropriate than acting as if we're
going to tighten immediately. I recognize that the price of gold has
come down from $400 to $371 and that really is a factor that parallels
the move that took place in the bond market; and that has worked very,
very well. And even if the fed funds rate is wrong, it would not be
appropriate at this time to increase the fed funds rate. I'm very

8/17/93

-42-

disappointed that we went past that window of opportunity and did not
get it done, and I am very concerned that, with the Japanese
yen/dollar exchange rate being where it is, we put ourselves in a
position in which the rate of inflation actually is going to be higher
than it would be if we had the fed funds rate at the level called for
That is, if magically we could go to "C" right now
by alternative C.
--we can't get there but if we could get a 3-1/2 percent instead of a
3 percent fed funds rate--the exchange value of the dollar versus the
yen would not be so precarious and we would not have the window that
is going to be there for price action by the automobile companies.
[They will raise] wholesale prices but that will show through [to
consumer prices and], we're going to have a higher inflation rate at a
3 percent funds rate than we would have if we had 3-1/2 percent.
I
also am concerned that a 3 percent rate provides lots of liquidity in
the financial markets and it provides an opportunity for certain
bubble events because money is scurrying here and there. At a 3
percent rate, we're chasing people out of M2 accounts to elsewhere.
And all of that chasing may not be in the interest of long-run
stability. So, I'm very uneasy with the fed funds rate where it is.
I recognize, Mr. Chairman, that this is not the time to increase it.
But more important than going back to asymmetric toward tightness
would be for us to look for windows to get the fed funds rate up
whenever we can.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I think as a tactical matter this probably is the
time to return to symmetry. It strikes me that it would take some
very surprising events to lead toward a change in the funds rate in
the five weeks before the next meeting. Having said that, I do have a
couple of reservations about a return to symmetry, one of which
already has been expressed. And that is that when it becomes public,
it may be subject to over-interpretation--not necessarily
misinterpretation but a "Now what are they up to or what do they see?"
kind of thing. But also I'm a little troubled by the fact that we
seem to be responding again to the latest price statistics. Now, it's
certainly true that they are better, but I have not heard anybody
express a much more positive view about longer-run inflation. The
forecast for the balance of this year and for 1994 is pretty much what
it has been for an extended period of time. It seems to me that we
really ought to be looking and thinking about that as we do this.
So,
I would be careful about putting a lot of emphasis on the fact that
the latest price data look better and that, therefore, we don't need
the asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I think a symmetric directive is
appropriate and I don't think that changes our long-run strategy
toward price stability, which is what we should have. This is an
operating paragraph and it should communicate what the Committee is
thinking. I don't see any inclination to change in the intermeeting
period. Therefore, I think we build credibility making that change
now as far as our future actions go.
So, I'm for symmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

8/17/93

-43-

MR. JORDAN. I have a general aversion to the idea behind
asymmetric, discretionary directives. And after listening to Don
Kohn's explanation of the meaning of switching back to symmetric, I
felt it left me with no choice but to prefer asymmetric if that's what
it means to move to symmetric. But when I think about leaving the
funds rate at 3 percent in view of the Greenbook projection on
inflation, it implies that the Committee says either that projection
is wrong or it's acceptable. I didn't hear any comments about whether
it was either wrong or acceptable to the Committee, which leaves me
puzzled about the comments about declaring victory. Those comments
are suggestions that the Greenbook projections on inflation are in
fact wrong rather than acceptable, I think. So, I'm not sure where I
come out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. I very happily support a symmetric directive. I
would like to underscore what has been implicit in many of the
comments--Tom Hoenig just now was quite explicit about it--that what
we're doing here is making a directive. It is a directive to the Open
Market Desk and its purpose first and foremost is to instruct the Desk
about what we expect over the intermeeting period. There is a
secondary effect and a secondary purpose in the area of signalling.
There is a large inevitability about that and it has to be considered;
it probably occasionally has to be dominant, but I would say only very
occasionally. The order of importance of these two is distinctly in
the area of first and foremost to provide direction to the Desk. And
that direction to the Desk at this time certainly is that there's
unlikely to be a change over the next five weeks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Alan, I agree with your analysis in terms of
going back. I think the directive ought to be symmetric. And I
think, as Wayne Angell said, that we ought not kid ourselves that
debating the language is really making policy. I don't think we used
it inappropriately. Because things didn't unfold to give us the
opportunity to move in that direction, it's appropriate to go back.
But we probably ought not overuse the tool because to some extent we
see the down side right now in terms of possible misinterpretation in
markets. And I agree with Bill McDonough that a statement could be
helpful at some point to clarify exactly what we mean by it because I
do think the press and others put much more weight on it than we may
intend.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since I assume we're going to vote in
that direction I just want to raise the caution here to everyone to be
very careful about the press because that could be quite damaging to
how we wish to proceed on this--whether or not we let the minutes
handle it or make an official statement or something of that sort.
The one thing we certainly want to be very careful about is that an
inadvertent remark by somebody in the System about policy strategy and
a variety of related issues can create some real difficulties for us
in this period. In any event, I do read that a majority is supportive
of symmetry and I'll ask Norm to read the appropriate paragraph.
MR. BERNARD. It's on page 13 of the Bluebook:
"In the
implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks

-44-

8/17/93

In
to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives of price stability
and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with modest growth in M2 and
little net change in M3 over the balance of the third quarter."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay, would you call the roll.

MR. BERNARD
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, the Committee is adjourned for
lunch and our next meeting is September 21st.
END OF MEETING

