Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
February 2-3,

1993

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, February 2, 1993, at 2:30 p.m. and was
continued on Wednesday, February 3, 1993, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
McTeer
Mullins
Phillips
Stern

Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron. Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston,
respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson,
and Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations
Ms. Lovett,
Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
1.
2.

Attended Wednesday session only.
Attended Tuesday session only.

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.
Ms.

Brady,
Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Rosine,
Senior Economist, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Wiles,
Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Winn,
Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors
Werneke,
Special Assistant to the Board, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Special Assistant to the General Counsel,
Siciliano,
Legal Division, Board of Governors
Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors

Messrs. Beebe, T. Davis, Dewald, Goodfriend, and Ms.
Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of San Francisco, Kansas City, St. Louis,
Richmond, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Gavin, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Cleveland
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

3.
4.

Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's
discussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run
objectives for monetary and debt aggregates.
Attended portion of the meeting relating to the release of
FOMC information to the public.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
February 2-3, 1993
February 2, 1993--Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Even though I have no legal authority at
the moment, I call the meeting to order. Governor Mullins has no
legal authority but he'll be Chairman pro tem.
MR. MULLINS.
It's my honor to nominate Chairman Greenspan as
Chairman of the FOMC for the coming year.
MR. LAWARE.

I second the nomination.

MR. MULLINS. Are there other nominations? Without
objection. I also have the great honor of nominating President
Corrigan as Vice Chairman of the FOMC for as long as he may be with us
and his successor thereafter for the year ending December '93.
Without objection, you're now legal.
MR. ANGELL. You mean an unnamed successor?
do to Jerry's confidence?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. MULLINS.

What does that

I'm not worried.

Well, you're legal.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm legal. We now have the issue of the
staff officers, and I'll request that Norm read the list.
MR. BERNARD.
Secretary and Economist, Donald L. Kohn;
Deputy Secretary, Normand R. V. Bernard;
Assistant Secretary, Joseph R. Coyne;
Assistant Secretary, Gary P. Gillum;
General Counsel, J. Virgil Mattingly;
Deputy General Counsel,
Ernest T. Patrikis;
Economist, Michael J. Prell;
Economist, Edwin M. Truman.
Associate Economists from the Board of Governors:

David E.Lindsey;
Larry J. Promisel;
Charles J. Siegman;
Thomas D. Simpson; and
Lawrence Slifman.
Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:
Richard G. Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;
Richard W. Lang, proposed by President Boehne;
Arthur J. Rolnick, proposed by President Stern;
Harvey Rosenblum, proposed by President McTeer; and
Karl A. Scheld, proposed by President Keehn.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless there are objections, I will
assume that the Committee accepts this slate of officers. The next
item on our organizational agenda is the selection of the New York
Bank as the Bank to execute transactions for the System Open Market

2/2-3/93

Account. Unless there are objections from the Committee, I will
assume that that also is authorized.
The next item on our agenda is the selection of the Manager
of the System Open Market Account, the Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations, and the Deputy Manager for Foreign Operations. Our
respective incumbents in these jobs, as you well know, are William J.
McDonough, Joan E. Lovett, and Margaret L. Greene. Unless I hear
objections, I will assume that the Committee authorizes another term
for all of them.
The next item is a review of the Authorization for Domestic
Open Market Operations, which I believe was circulated to the members
of the Committee. Unless somebody has any questions relevant to it, I
will assume that the authorization is reaffirmed.
[Secretary's note:
No objections were heard with regard to any of the above items.]
Mr. Truman will now take us to our next agenda item, which is
a review of several matters relevant to the foreign [side].
MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, there are four items to consider:
the Foreign Currency Authorization, the Foreign Currency Directive,
the Procedural Instructions, and the related agreement to warehouse
foreign currencies for the United States Treasury. There is a
technical change proposed for the Foreign Currency Authorization and
the Procedural Instructions concerning the change of the structure of
the management of the System Open Market Account and the new positions
of Manager and Deputy Managers.
I will be glad to answer any
questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you like to say a few words on the
Gonzalez letter relating to the purchases of the Mexican peso?
MR. TRUMAN. We thought that the Committee ought to be aware
of the fact that Congressman Gonzalez in one of his January 19th
letters raised a number of somewhat garbled questions about the swap
network, foreign currency operations, and in particular the purchases
of the Mexican peso, all of which have been done in connection with
swap operations completely covered by foreign operations. He asked us
to provide material to him covering the history of these arrangements
going back to the beginning of time or pretty close to it--1962. We
are in the process of doing that. Almost all of what we're going to
provide involves documents that are already in the public record in
the form of the Managers' reports and excerpts from the FOMC policy
records with regard to the Mexican swap arrangements and how they have
evolved since 1967.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unless there is an objection, the vote
that we will now have would amend the Foreign Currency Authorization
and the two additional documents indicated by Ted only with respect to
the updating of the managers' titles. Would somebody like to move
[their approval]?
MR. KELLEY.

So moved, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is there a second?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Second.

2/2-3/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. The next item is the
[report on the] examination of the System Open Market Account, which
has been circulated. Unless there is a question or an objection, I
will assume that that also is accepted.
Having worked our way through the organizational items with
seeming tranquility, we now get to the less interesting part of our
meeting and I will ask somebody to move approval of the minutes of the
December 22nd meeting.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. SYRON.

Move it.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
present the foreign currency operations [report]?
MS. GREENE.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Gretchen, would you
[Statement--see

Questions for Gretchen?

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is perhaps a question more
for you. Do we have any idea at this point what the attitude of the
Administration is with respect to intervention?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, but I've been having some
preliminary discussions with Larry Summers on precisely that question,
and I should think we will get some judgments reasonably quickly as to
what set of principles they would like to be supportive of.
I've
suggested that we develop those principles jointly and, hopefully,
that will be initiated sooner rather than later.
In fact, I just
discussed it with him this morning.
MR. JORDAN. I was monitoring the Call from the November
meeting through year-end. As the news unfolded about the [domestic]
economy being stronger than before versus Europe and versus the rest
of the world, I had no sense on a day-to-day basis that we were
positioned [correctly] for the environment we're going into.
If you
didn't have the inherited position, would you wish to have a larger

position in foreign currencies or different currencies or a smaller
position?
Do you feel you're positioned with the right portfolio for
this environment?
MS. GREENE. Are you talking about the portfolio of the
Federal Reserve and the Treasury?
MR. JORDAN.

Yes.

MR. MCDONOUGH. Gretchen has done that remarkable thing,
which is to flip the ball upward. Most of our reserves are in marks
and yen, and those are certainly the two currencies that I think one
would want the reserves to be in. We hold for the two monetary
authorities approximately $40 billion in total reserves now, which
would impress me as at about the upper end of the reserves that one
would consider appropriate. What I'm less certain about is what the
lower end of that is because I do subscribe to the view that on the
day when we need them we surely don't want to have to pass the hat and

2/2-3/93

go get them. We have a few remnants of reserves from the past in
sterling and Swiss francs.
I would think, as we move forward in our
discussions with the Treasury, that we might wish to concentrate on
the reserves of the two most useful currencies [for intervention
purposes].
If one starts with the notion that reserves are good to
have, which I do, I don't think the present level of our reserves is
too high. But I think it is at about the upper limit of what we would
need.
MR. TRUMAN. I might comment that we don't always position
our holdings as if we were maximizing the [return] in our portfolio in
a short-run sense. That's not the way the Domestic Desk runs its
operations.
If you were a private citizen, you might choose something
else.
MR. JORDAN. If I could follow-up on that comment:
I suppose
the analysis as to whether we had the right amount or not would be
quite different on the domestic portfolio than it would be on the
foreign currency portfolio--assets denominated in foreign currencies.
You would not make the same after-the-fact judgment about whether we
had the right amount or not.
MR. TRUMAN. I think you're right in what you're referring
to, but I think the ex-post analysis would be equally difficult since
we don't really know until we've liquidated [our position].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?
If not, let's move
to the domestic open market operations and Mr. McDonough.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you have any sense as to how market
participants are viewing the size of the proposed short-term stimulus
package and its impact on intermediate- and long-term rates?
MR. MCDONOUGH.

The growing feeling, prior to Secretary

Bentsen's using the number $30 billion, had been that the likely size
of the package would be in the $15 to $20 billion range. And I think
that was very thoroughly discounted and was being explained as about
the minimum the new President could get away with given the campaign
promises. When [the figure] gets up to about $30 billion--and
certainly anything beyond that--I'd say the market has not prepared
itself for a fiscal package of that size. Therefore, when it gets
beyond, say, $25 billion, I think it could create something of a
backup, especially in intermediate rates. However, this will all be
done against a background of what degree of credibility there is in
longer-term deficit reduction. So, the larger the number in the short
term, the more convincing the package for longer-term deficit
reduction is going to have to be. But it still will be looked at as a
package with a desire--not necessarily on the part of the Street firms
but we think, [based on] what they say, of the ultimate investors--to
believe that there may be a fiscal breakthrough. There seems to be a
desire to believe as [investors] start moving out the yield curve and
picking up more duration that they will pick up more yield. It's a
rather emotional climate that can be easily dissatisfied. But it's
sitting there waiting to be satisfied. That is how I read it now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Other questions for Bill?

Tom Melzer.

-5-

2/2-3/93

MR. MELZER. Bill, do you have any sense of what the market
is discounting on the mix of this refunding package?
Is there an
expectation of a significant reduction in the [size of the] bond
[issue]?
MR. MCDONOUGH. Until last Friday when the word came out of
Roger Altman's comments on the McLaughlin show, which was aired
Sunday, I think there was a feeling that the 30-year bond could be
reduced in size to, say, as low as $8 billion. After Altman said what
he did, my guess is that the number has crept back up and that people
think the reduction, if any, will be more nominal.
If I had to pick a
number now, I'd say they probably assume it will be $9 billion or a
fraction more.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Bill?
would somebody like to move to ratify the transactions?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

If not,

So moved.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Thank you very much.
We now move on to Messrs. Prell, Slifman, and Truman and the Chart
Show.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll give you a second
to locate the chart package that was put in front of you.
MESSRS. PRELL, TRUMAN, and SLIFMAN.
Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statements--see

Questions for our colleagues?

MR. SYRON. Mike, you touched on this. What are you inclined
to think--I guess not terribly much--about these arguments on the
composition of inventories?
I've seen things about work-in-process
inventories having declined more than inventories at the wholesale and
retail levels.

MR. PRELL. Well, there are longer-term movements one can
observe. I think manufacturers have made particular progress over
time in reducing materials and work-in-process.
But basically our
assessment is that inventories are probably at comfortable to lean
levels at this point. Retailers reported stronger-than-expected sales
coming out of the Christmas season, which suggests their inventories
probably are in good shape. And manufacturers' inventories would seem
quite likely to be rather lean in light of the volume of shipments
reported in December.
MR. SYRON. The increase you have in inventories is not
focused in any one sector particularly?
MR. PRELL. Not really. As I've said, we don't have a large
increase. We just perceive that with sales seemingly on a clearly
upward path, [business firms] are going to want to stay closer to that
trend in their [inventory] stocking. Even so, as we indicated, we

-6-

2/2-3/93

still allowed for some downward tilt in the inventory/sales ratio.
While the arithmetic of the current quarter is such that it looks like
inventories are a significant story, looking at the broader picture we
don't really see that as a key driver in the forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Ted, what assumptions have you made in regard to
the international trade process including GATT and the likelihood of
dumping and possibly increased protectionism that might be
forthcoming?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, as far as NAFTA is concerned, we are
assuming that it will be passed and put into force; if it isn't, that
would be a negative factor on our forecast coming through Mexico. As
far as the Uruguay rounds are concerned, we have made no assumptions
because we convinced ourselves that in the 1993-94 period it is
irrelevant, if I can put it that way, in terms of its trade expansion
impact.
That's not to say, though, that the failure of the Uruguay
rounds in some form, or rather the wrong kind of failure, couldn't be
a disaster looking out a little further. As far as other trade
measures are concerned, we have not taken explicit account of those-maybe we should have--partly because of our feeling that developments
like this steel dumping and so forth and so on, although they are
politically sensitive in both the domestic and international
dimensions, are not sufficiently important quantitatively to have a
major macro-economic influence on the forecast. The other reason is
that, while there is considerable scope for those kinds of actions,
they have long time tables on them. And most other forms of action
are precluded by international agreement, so there are some
constraints. So, we could have further dumping cases; but if they
were all filed tomorrow, we wouldn't get them implemented until late
in the year, so that would have a relatively small-MR. ANGELL. But in the steel cases do we not [impose]
necessity of posting bond so that already in the February--

the

MR. TRUMAN. But the total amount of trade imports that are
affected by that is $3 billion.
MR. ANGELL. I understand. But do you think any modification
of pricing behavior would be likely in this kind of environment?
MR. TRUMAN. There is considerable dispute on that point.
I've noticed articles in the newspapers and some commentary from
President Keehn, based on his contacts in the market, that the
producers are looking forward to this $3 billion, which is a nontrivial increase in sales, and the opportunity to raise prices behind
those dumping markets. On the other hand, the economists' argument is
that there are a lot of other producers in this world and quite a lot
of competition around the margin from other U.S. industries. That
would suggest that the [prospects] of steel prices going up by the 15
or 20 percent average margins being plotted here are pretty unlikely.
In any case, in thinking about all this there are enough uncertainties
that we decided not to take explicit account of it.
MR. ANGELL.

Thank you.

2/2-3/93

MR. KEEHN. I can comment on that, Wayne. The people I talk
with say that the dumping suits ought to result in about a 4 million
ton change in shipments this year. The production level in the steel
industry currently is about 80 percent of capacity. Based on this one
change it could go up to, say, 85 percent. And shipments this year as
a result could go up to 88 to 89 million tons.
In terms of price,
there is a proposed price increase for cold roll, hot roll, and coated
products [scheduled] for early April, and they expect that increase to
stick. This affects about 50 percent of overall steel production and,
therefore, the anticipated overall increase in the price of steel is 2
percent for this year.
MR. ANGELL. Thank you.
what I would have expected.

That's very helpful.

It's about

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It actually sounds much larger than I
would have expected. You said 4 million tons?
MR. KEEHN. Yes, as a consequence of this change and the
change that took place late last year, imports will be down by 4
million [unintelligible] 5 to 6 million tons.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

When I see it, I'll believe!

President

Stern.
MR. STERN. One of my questions was along the lines of
Wayne's on protectionism. My second question relates to this issue of
the liquifying of home equity. Do we have evidence that that has an
independent effect--independent of the normal wealth effect we might
Is there something additional there?
get as home equity rises?
MR. SLIFMAN. Well, I think the main [effect] would be on
those households that might feel their liquidity is constrained. That
is to say, the wealth is there but the [increased] ability of such
households to liquify that wealth could boost consumption. The other
point is that in the case of turnover of the [housing] stock, some
would argue that when capital gains are realized we do see evidence
that some of those realized capital gains are not plowed back into the
housing industry. One can see that from the mortgage debt data. So
we have a feeling that some of [the capital gains] are being used to
support consumption. We also note from the refinancing data that a
fair amount of cash is being taken out there, too. There is no direct
econometric evidence, but other kinds of ancillary information seem to
suggest that this is going on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. How sensitive do you believe job growth is to
GDP growth? Suppose we ended up with GDP growth closer to 4 percent
than 3 percent. How do you think that would translate into job
growth?
MR. PRELL. Well, at this stage we'd probably see a large
share of that showing up in employment growth. One is hard pressed at
this time to pin down what the productivity trends are.
But I think
at this stage, given the shedding of labor that has occurred, we'd
expect to see a larger proportion show up in actual employment

-8-

2/2-3/93

increases. I'm not sure whether you're talking employment hours
versus numbers of workers.
MR. BOEHNE.

Numbers.

MR. PRELL. Again, we'd expect it to show up to a greater
extent in numbers of workers rather than a lengthening of the
workweek.
MR. BOEHNE. That's my question. We see these structural
adjustments by the larger firms. However, in talking to people in
smaller businesses one gets the impression that there really is a
reluctance to add people, for obvious reasons, but that if their
volume picked up they more or less would be forced into it.
MR. PRELL. That's the thrust of my remarks. I'm sure there
is still some elasticity in many cases and they could [increase
production] without adding more workers. But I think we are getting
closer to that margin here and, on the presumption that additional
growth is demand driven rather than an increase of potential supply,
we'd look for additional hiring.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mike, you indicated that the difference between
the Blue Chip forecast and the staff forecast of real growth and what
has happened to the unemployment rate probably is not a sufficient
explanation of the difference in the forecasts with regard to prices.
That difference is rather large. Is there any way to know, for
example, if they are making different assumptions about food and
energy prices that would explain the difference or if they have a
different Phillips curve?

MR. PRELL. Well, we're making some inferences here. We
don't have any information about [their assumptions for] food or
energy prices.

But it seems unlikely, given the general

tenor of

[developments] in those markets, that that would be a major factor.
We've been seeing this pattern for some time. At this time in 1992 I
think one would have perceived a difference in outlooks. And we feel
somewhat vindicated by events, which showed in fact that we could have
some decent growth with the disinflation trend continuing. Some of my
colleagues have suggested that this pattern is one that could be
perceived in private forecasts over a number of years. That is, at
this point in a cycle, during the early expansion phase of a recovery,
forecasters have tended to expect an acceleration [in inflation].
Our
interpretation of history, some of which is visible in the chart, is
that that is not an empirical regularity; indeed, with significant
slack the tendency is for inflation to slow. It is something of a
mystery why we're at odds with so many of these forecasters.
MR. PARRY. Did you say that their forecasts involve a fairly
significant increase in nominal interest rates at the short end, in
which case they're probably assuming the same real short-term interest
rates as in your forecast?
MR. PRELL. Well, to a first approximation that may work
here. The Treasury bill rate in the fourth quarter of 1994 in the
Blue Chip average is 4-1/2 percent, which is more than a point higher

-9-

2/2-3/93

than our forecast. And there is a similar picture in the inflation
So, yes, I think that may come out fairly close.
[outlook].
MR. PARRY.

[They are] much more pessimistic.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mike, on productivity growth we had a very
gratifying 3 percent in 1992 but, although the expansion continues at
more or less the same pace, you are projecting that productivity
growth is going to come off rather badly over the forecast period to
1.8 percent and then 1.3 percent. Why?
MR. PRELL. Well, let me emphasize that in a broad historical
perspective those numbers don't constitute bad productivity
performance. Those numbers are stronger than the trends in recent
years and would be above what we would regard as the likely underlying
trend at this time. Basically, the typical pattern is that in early
phases of recovery we get very large productivity increases as some
stretching of the available work force occurs. This time we had a lot
of labor shedding and we haven't had even the normal employment gains.
And we think this process will only go so far before, harking back to
President Boehne's question, [firms] begin to have to add some workers
as they expand production. As I noted, there's probably some distance
to go in this labor shedding process--not so much for typical cyclical
reasons but because there are some large firms who probably have the
capital to hang in there for a long time and not make the adjustments
they should have made a long time ago in the size of their operations.
I think firms like Sears or IBM are going to be shedding workers for a
while. That is an ingredient in the process that gives us what we
believe to be above-trend productivity increases.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mike, let me piggyback on Ed Boehne's
question. If we get a significant upside miss on real GDP, say, to
growth rate of] 4 percent, what does that do to your inflation
projections? Would it make a significant difference?
MR. PRELL.

Well, that becomes a difficult question.

[a

One, we

would expect the unemployment rate, as a first approximation, probably
to be 1/2 percentage point lower at the end of a year-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But doesn't that also depend on what the
assumption is on productivity?
MR. PRELL. Indeed, as I noted before, I'm taking this
[greater strength] as a surprise that comes more from the demand side.
And one does need to specify that to be clear. If it were entirely
from productivity performance and we were accommodating, then it would
not have any inflationary consequences.
MR. BROADDUS.

I'm not thinking about the miss--

MR. PRELL. A 1/2 percentage point lower unemployment rate
would give us a shade more inflationary pressure, but it wouldn't show
up very much in 1993 given the normal lags in the process. The other
risk, though, is what I alluded to before. Growth of 4 percent begins

2/2-3/93

-10-

to be a noticeably faster pace of expansion, where perhaps one needs
to worry a bit more about so-called speed effects. And that might
intensify the inflationary pressures relative to what I just said. So
it could quite possibly be a situation in which there is little, if
any, further progress in disinflation in 1993, especially if that
growth came early on and we were getting a rapid drop in unemployment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. I was just wondering in the revised green
sheets why the nominal GDP for the fourth quarter went down so much?
MR. PRELL. Well, in an accounting sense the implicit
deflator came in much lower than we expected. Relative to the fixed
weight price index, that was largely a consequence of the behavior of
service import prices.
This is an artifact of the way they deflate
In fact, we have some information that
the insurance payments.
suggests that all of those price measures may be off by a few tenths
But
due to an error that [BEA] made in their import price measures.
that still would leave a considerably lower number than we were
anticipating.
MS. PHILLIPS.

So, you think we might hear more on this yet?

MR. PRELL. Well, not on this divergence necessarily, but
it's hard to say. If there are vastly different inventory movements
or credit movements than they've anticipated, it could alter these
numbers significantly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.

Al Broaddus asked my question.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOENIG.

President Melzer.

Any further questions?

Just one question on savings.

Given some of the

demographics you showed here, I'm curious as to why you are expecting
the saving rate to stay as low or lower than we might otherwise have
thought.
MR. SLIFMAN. Well, it's true, as my other chart shows, that
we have this shifting of the baby boomers into peak life cycle saving
years and that demographic factor [tends to raise] the saving rate.
But, as I suggested, working the other way are economic factors,
primarily the fact that net worth positions are a bit stronger and
that household perceptions of income and job prospects seem to be
improving substantially. Both of those would tend to give you a lower
saving rate. Finally, though, there is the statistical question of
who knows what the real level [of savings] is anyway!
MR. HOENIG.

Then this could be more of a temporary--

MR. SLIFMAN. Yes.
It is true that in some longer-run sense,
all other things equal, we would expect the demographics to work
toward a higher saving rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions?

2/2-3/93

-11-

MR. ANGELL. Yes, I just want to follow-up.
If there's an
error in [their estimate of] the deflator, would that be an error in
the nominal or in the real?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, the error has to do with the pricing of
capital goods imports. They put two large price increases in the
fourth quarter through an error. That would feed through to give you
a lower increase in the prices of imports, which contracts GDP and
gives a slightly higher overall deflator everything else equal.
MR. ANGELL.

So then real GDP will go down?

MR. TRUMAN. If we presume that their assumptions about the
nominal value of capital goods imports are unchanged, it would
increase the real value of capital goods imports and would subtract
one or two billion dollars from real GDP in the fourth quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
otherwise?

Are there any reasons to believe

MR. TRUMAN. No, but one has to understand that there's a big
error band around what they assume.
It could be wiped out completely
by other changes. That's all I'm trying to say.
MR. PRELL. For one, we don't have the December trade data
yet, so anything in this area is open to substantial change. We've
received a number of pieces of data since BEA published the fourth
quarter, including the durable goods figures and the construction
figures. Doing a sort of full accounting, adding up all of these
things, we come out very close at this point to our Greenbook estimate
of 3.6 percent. So, it isn't a material difference from what BEA has
at this point; we'll just have to wait and see what the additional
data show.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?
If not, who would
President Broaddus.
like to start the tour de table?
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, with respect to our District,
things are still looking pretty good both currently and prospectively.
Economic activity in the region appears to be accelerating moderately.
The improvement in residential construction nationally is helping our
region quite a bit.
Industries like lumber, textiles, furniture, and
appliance manufacturers, all of which are [important] industries in
the Fifth District and are driven by housing activity, are all doing
better. The most striking development in the District, though, is
what I would call a markedly greater optimism, pretty much across the
board, about the near-term outlook. We see it in our directors'
comments and we see it in our various surveys of real estate people,
retailers, and manufacturers. Actually, this improvement in optimism
has been going on for several months but it strikes us as more
pervasive, less tentative, and--as one of our directors put it--deeper
than it was before.
One specific sectoral comment may be of interest. We are
seeing what we think are pretty clear signs of a turn in the market
for office space in some of our local areas, specifically in
Washington, Richmond, and Charlotte. Absorption rates are rising;
vacancy rates are declining. In particular, large blocks of space--in

2/2-3/93

-12-

excess, say, of 30,000 square feet--are becoming increasingly harder
to find, especially in the suburban office malls.
Our forecast is very similar to that in the Greenbook. In
fact, it is almost identical for both real GDP and inflation.
In that
regard, I would point out that we do our forecast differently than
does the Board staff. Specifically, we use a small VAR model as the
basis for our forecast, judgmentally adjusted, which is quite
different from a structural model. The fact that our forecast is
close to the Board staff's, given the fact that we do it differently,
gives me a little bit of comfort.
I would make the point that our VAR
model in recent months has done a particularly good job in forecasting
the decline in the inflation rate. I think what that means is that
our policy of maintaining sufficient monetary restraint has generated
improvement on the inflation front. It has been in place long enough
to be captured by the data we use in the model.
So, our longer-run
strategy is working and we are making some progress.

MR. KEEHN. With regard to the national outlook, our forecast
has somewhat lower growth than the Greenbook. We don't have any major
differences, but our numbers are a little lower across the spectrum of
components. For example, our number for personal consumption, is
lower. We also have lower business fixed investment, exports, and
housing starts. There are more differences in consumer nondurables
and services than in durables.
In terms of the District, I think there has been a decided
improvement in attitudes about the underlying rate of expansion since
the last meeting. The positive retail outlook coming out of what was
a strong Christmas held up surprisingly well in January. The
Christmas season seemed very strong, particularly in places like
Michigan where the Retailers Association reported that over 70 percent
of their members experienced sales increases and that attitudes were
"generally euphoric."
An appliance manufacturer located in Michigan
reported a fantastic

fourth quarter, the best since 1978.

They expect

a good sales increase this year--not as strong as last year, but still
a good increase.
In the auto industry, while the most recent sales
data have been a little on the soft side, first-quarter production
schedules have been set about 20 percent over last year. And with
inventories currently at what seem like quite reasonable levels, the
first-quarter production risk doesn't seem that high. I will say,
though, that the industry is forecasting--or at least those we talk
to--a somewhat higher sales number for the year than we are. The
heavy truck business continues to be strong. The industry's incoming
order rate is running at an annual level of 165,000 to 175,000 units.
That's higher than current production rates, so the order backlog is
beginning to lengthen to a delivery [schedule] that the industry is
not comfortable with. And if this order rate is sustained, they are
likely to add to their production levels.
Attitudes in the steel business understandably have improved
considerably since the dumping suits were announced. I've already
commented on the price impact that that is likely to have, but they do
think that the announced price increases on the products that I
mentioned are likely to stick this time.
I would point out, however,
that the price increases that will result from that are from very,
very low levels. Their pricing has been awfully soft for an extended

2/2-3/93

-13-

period. With regard to inflation, the pricing environment continues
to be favorable. Very heavy market pressures are holding down price
increases. But I will say that this time at least one or two
companies did comment about some modest increases in their
expectations regarding the cost of their raw materials purchases. The
steel price increase is certainly a part of this, but there are some
other parts as well.
These are not significant shifts in terms of the
amount; nonetheless, it's the first time I've heard this in quite a
while. Offsetting what I think are pretty good economic reports,
almost every company executive that I talk to expects to continue to
reduce their employment. Everybody says that they are simply going to
produce more this year with fewer people; this has come to be the
macho thing to do.
And, therefore, while the immediate outlook has
improved, the question of sustainability continues to be the key
issue. Either employment and disposable income are going to increase
to support this higher level of consumption or we're going to see
consumption come down a bit.
So, while the outlook seems much more
balanced than it has been, I do think the risks, given this disposable
income issue, continue to be a little on the down side. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District economy
remains mixed, but unfortunately there are new signs of weakness in
several states. California's employment fell about 1.8 percent in
1992 and the pace of decline has not slackened in recent months.
Moreover, the California recession is no longer just a southern
California phenomenon. Early last year we saw about 80 percent of the
job losses coming from southern California, which is far in excess of
that area's relative contribution to employment. More recently, about
60 percent of the job losses are coming from southern California.
Other areas such as the Bay Area, the Central Valley, and other parts
of California are also reporting losses that are not all that
different from that of southern California in percentage terms.
Concern also is rising in Washington state where Boeing
cutbacks are threatening to choke off that state's recovery. I would
point out that actual employment has been rising rather robustly in
recent months in the state of Washington, but Boeing as I'm sure
you've all seen--it was actually commented on in the Greenbook--has
announced significant cutbacks in planned production beginning in the
second half of this year. The specific layoff figures are not yet
available but analysts in the region clearly are concerned and are
talking about the multiplier effects of any further job cuts.
Hawaii's economy may be facing a recession this year. Weak tourism
from the mainland, particularly California, is a concern and has been
a problem. But a new and larger concern is that rising job insecurity
in Japan, which is a very big source of money for Hawaii, could
eventually cut into the Japanese visitor count. Lending activity
remains very weak in the District, with loans outstanding at large
banks in December falling 8.1 percent below the year-ago level.
There are some bright spots in the region, however; we've
found one or two! The drought conditions eased dramatically in
California and the Pacific northwest. At the present time, water
officials are reluctant to declare an end to the drought, but
estimates of available supplies have increased sharply. Christmas
sales were not too bad. As a matter of fact, even in southern

2/2-3/93

-14-

California Christmas sales were stronger than had been anticipated. A
very large retailer in our District indicated that sales continued to
be good in January and that January may turn out to be the best month
they've had for the past year. Utah and Idaho continue to report
strong economic conditions, while Alaska, Arizona, and Oregon are
reporting moderate growth.
Turning to the national economy, the data released since the
last meeting have been encouraging; they certainly suggest that the
economy is in a sustained moderate expansion. Our forecasts, if you
assume no change in monetary or fiscal policy, are very similar to
those in the Greenbook. We project somewhat stronger growth in
investment and less consumption than the Greenbook. With real GDP
growing below potential we expect the downward trend in inflation to
continue; our forecast for the CPI, for example, is that it will
average around 2-1/2 percent this year. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the District,
the news continues to be quite good. In fact, I think I can now
change the adjective that I've been using to describe growth in the
Sixth District from modest to moderate. I think the District is going
to outperform the nation; that's partly reflected in the unemployment
rates that we had at the end of 1992, which were below the national
average for every state except Louisiana. Christmas sales were quite
good. People were very pleased with the performance in that area.
And consumer spending in January appears to be holding up quite well,
although not quite at the rate we had in December. Tourism continues
to be a positive factor in the District and that's represented not
only by domestic tourism but by foreign visitors as well.
Manufacturers are reporting moderate gains in activity right through
mid-January and business lending is holding up fairly well in contrast
to what's happening in the rest of the country. Housing continues to
be positive, and the housing-related industries like carpets,
furniture, appliances, and so on are also quite good. We [see
evidence of] more interest in investment on the part of business,
particularly for equipment and most notably computers.
As some others have commented this afternoon, I too think
that attitudes are much, much better than they have been over the past
several months. And I think that's accounted for in part by more
realistic expectations on the part of business. As we came out of the
recession most businesses were anticipating a much stronger recovery.
Now they're beginning to understand that we're not going to get growth
like we did in past recoveries. There also is a sense of optimism
that the deficit reduction program will [materialize].
And perhaps
more importantly, there is a feeling among business people I talk to
that the fiscal stimulus package will not be excessive, and I believe
that's helping attitudes as well.
We do, of course, have negatives in our regional economy.
Nonresidential construction continues to be one of them. We're having
significant declines in employment in major companies, particularly
the airline industry. The health services industry, which had been
accelerating quite rapidly in terms of employment, is now beginning to
decelerate a bit. The energy sector is still weak. The rig count was
92 versus 88 one year earlier, so there's not much change there. And

-15-

2/2-3/93

oil and gas production is not up to the levels that we had prior to
Hurricane Andrew. On the fiscal side, about half the states in the
District are likely to raise taxes or they are going to face pressures
on spending. I don't hear anybody talking about price increases at
all in the District, so I think inflation is not a concern. Putting
together those negatives and positives, I think the positives clearly
outweigh the negatives.
As I said, the economic situation is good in
the Atlanta District.
With respect to the national economy, our forecast is very
little changed from the last time. We have GDP expanding a bit faster
than the Greenbook, the CPI marginally higher, and unemployment down
by a little less. We don't have as much gain in productivity, and our
net export situation does not deteriorate as rapidly as in the
Greenbook forecast.
But these differences are very small. So, we
think that '93 will wind up pretty much the way the Greenbook
forecasts it.
In general, Mr. Chairman, I think we have reason to be
confident about the outcome this year. And I continue to be confident
that this is a sustainable recovery, although I think the euphoria
that some people are demonstrating is being a bit overdone as was the
pessimism earlier on.
I'm a little concerned about the sustainability
of consumer expenditures. And the biggest concern that I have in
terms of the impact on policy, obviously, is the situation with
respect to employment.
These layoffs are getting more attention than
they perhaps deserve and people are getting increasingly "spooked," if
I may use that term, by the media attention to the layoffs that are
occurring. But in general I think the situation is pretty good.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, our region of the country
continues to grow slowly, steadily however, with strong agriculture
and construction sectors and less robust manufacturing and energy
sectors.
First of all, I would say that our employment picture is
mixed, with fairly decent employment growth in the Kansas City area
and in Colorado and New Mexico, and fairly poor employment growth in
other parts of our region, particularly in Oklahoma. Although that is
the case, the optimism is uniformly good even in Oklahoma where
there's less job growth. A lot of efforts are going forward to
encourage employment growth where [possible].
In the agricultural
area, as you well know, increased livestock prices last year kept farm
incomes higher than originally expected. However, I'm pleased that as
far as the land prices go, there's a little speck of renewed optimism
in that they have stayed fairly flat. Construction activity is very
strong, obviously helped along by residential construction. And
though there has been some modest slowdown since November, our
construction levels are still a good 25 to 30 percent higher than they
were a year ago. Manufacturing is generally sluggish. There is a
stable environment in the auto industry, particularly at GM where
there's a lot of uncertainty in our area. And [activity at] our Ford
manufacturing plants is very good. We, too, are affected by the
announcements of [cutbacks at] Boeing, which will affect our Wichita
area. Generally that will be handled gradually, but it will be a drag
because it's a very important part of that economy. Nevertheless,
overall there should still be some good job growth in Kansas,
particularly in the Kansas City area. In the energy area, natural gas
drilling has fallen off since the end of the year because of tax
changes. Nevertheless, the number of rigs operating is still 50

2/2-3/93

-16-

percent over what it was a year ago and that is at least a positive
event in our part of the country. So, overall, we [anticipate] steady
growth for the region going forward.
As far as the national economy goes, our projection, allowing
perhaps for some differences in fiscal policy, is very similar to the
Greenbook forecast. We have a little slower growth in the first part
of the year but that picks up. For the year as a whole our projection
is very similar to that of the Greenbook both for GDP and for the
inflation picture.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. In terms of our projection overall, we're at the
high end of the central tendencies except, of course, for unemployment
where we're at the low end. I'd make several observations about these
projections. One point I've made before is that because of the [wide]
confidence intervals I think it's a very difficult basis on which to
make policy. And that's particularly true with respect to timeframes
and inflation. Our inflation forecast for '93, even though it is at
the high end of the central tendency, is still what I would call a
very benign forecast. But in a sense it's irrelevant because of the
impact of policy on prices and much longer time lags in that area.
Just as an aside, Mr. Chairman, as you're thinking about the HumphreyHawkins testimony, given particularly what I read on the questioning
at some of the [previous] hearings, that might not be a bad point to
make about current price performance. I'm not making it the way you
would in testimony, but I'd suggest a little education about [the fact
that] future price behavior is not necessarily governed by what is
happening right now with respect to prices.
for
the
not
the

I have the general sense that the pieces seem to be in place
a fairly strong cumulative upturn. So, in terms of the risk in
forecast, I would say that there's a significant upside risk. I'm
as confident that we'll see continuing declines in inflation over
next couple of years as in the Board staff's forecast.

District-wide we're seeing an acceleration of economic
activity. It's pretty consistent with what Bob Forrestal was saying.
I guess a change from "modest" to "moderate" is probably reasonable,
Bob. In the most recent three-month period we are seeing 2 percent
employment growth and before we were seeing growth in maybe tenths of
a percent. Still, we have more or less the same pattern--flat--in
manufacturing employment; the growth in the District is coming from
the nonmanufacturing sectors. The other comment I would make is that
even in that 2 percent growth number we're absorbing fairly
significant head winds in a couple of areas, specifically electrical
equipment and construction. In that three-month period both declined
3 or 4 times as much as they did nationally and [yet] we're still
showing that kind of overall growth for the District. As far as real
estate is concerned, the residential side is a strong point, as has
been mentioned for some other areas. We are seeing in the most recent
period some weakness in the commercial area, but on an annual basis we
still have significant growth in both residential and nonresidential
construction.
As for anecdotal comments, what I've experienced is very much
similar to what Al Broaddus described. The tone of the comments I'm

2/2-3/93

-17-

picking up--and I guess the sample where I have the most consistent
experience would be our St. Louis directors--has changed very
dramatically in the last two times we've talked about monetary policy
in that the comments are much more positive. What I sense is a lot of
caution, though, with respect to getting too optimistic.
In other
words, I don't sense the ebullience that I have read into some of the
comments here; there is still a good deal of caution. And I think we
may be affected by [the fact that] this whole recovery and expansion
process has taken so long that it's difficult to make oneself get too
constructive about it.
But the tone of the comments definitely has
changed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. My sense is that the District continues to move
forward, but I don't think I've graduated up to the term "moderate;"
I'd keep it at "modest."
I think we're still lagging the nation.
Manufacturing has been a relatively bright spot. The retailers,
including the auto dealers, have been pleasantly surprised by how well
sales have been going. I'm increasingly impressed, however, by how
deep the hole is in commercial real estate construction. The more I
talk to people in that area, the more I think we may have a problem
for much of the rest of the decade in terms of getting caught up
there. With regard to attitudes, it's not so much that there is an
improvement in attitudes but a lack of complaining about what's bad.
So, underneath, I think there is-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's called improvement.

MR. BOEHNE. That's improvement. It's not an overt statement
In fact, as one talks to
of improvement, but I do take heart in that.
groups of people, they want to talk about things other than the
economy and monetary policy. They would rather complain about
unemployment compensation, medical costs, and those sort of things.
I
I am impressed,
take that as a rather positive change in attitudes.
though, by the variation in economic activity around a relatively a
small District; 75 miles in several directions can make quite a
difference. New Jersey, for example, continues to operate at low
Pennsylvania
levels, and the expectations there are not high at all.
seems to mirror the nation more and Delaware continues to do better.
I do sense that people have made the adjustment toward the notion that
we're in for a number of years of slower growth and that the decade of
the '80s is not likely to repeat itself.
I don't sense any price pressures coming. Someone made the
comment that it's almost a macho thing [for firms] to say they are
going to hold employment down; I think that attitude is very strong.
Lending, outside the consumer area, [particularly] business lending,
continues to be fairly weak. I still hear comments that there's some
action in the pipeline but it's turning out to be a very long
pipeline.
It's not coming out the end of the pipeline to the point
where we actually see the loans on the books.
Despite that somewhat less optimistic view at the District
level, my sense is that we will do better in terms of growth at the
national level.
[My view stems] not so much from pointing at this
sector or that sector. I just have a sense from talking to people
with national businesses and looking at the national indicators that

2/2-3/93

-18-

this national recovery may be taking better hold. So my sense is that
if we err on GDP growth, it's going to be 3 percent plus rather than 3
percent minus.
I also have the feeling that if we are wrong on the
inflation side, its performance may be better.
I think we have some
disinflation momentum going here that we may be missing. What lies
beyond in '94 and '95 could be a different story, but I suspect that
inflation in '93 will turn out to be better than the numbers in the
Greenbook. Having said all that, if I were a professional forecaster,
I probably wouldn't be all that far from the Board staff's forecast.
But I'm not a professional forecaster; I can wing it a little, not
that the staff wings it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, the favorable
trends that have been under way in the District for quite some time
are continuing and, if anything, probably strengthening a bit. But
rather than run down all the sectors, the one exception that stands
out is probably commercial construction, which is quite mixed
depending on [the area].
Attitudes, I'd say, are generally good,
although I continue to come across comments, as soon as GM or Sears or
somebody makes a major restructuring announcement, such as:
"How can
you consider this a recovery when that kind of thing is going on?"
I
think that does reflect some of the concerns that are still lingering.
As has also been the case for some time, there really is not
much, if any, sign of inflationary pressures. Business people are
increasingly resigned to price stability, I might say, and are willing
to live with it!
That may have to do in a way with what we're seeing
in productivity; if so, it would certainly augur well for at least the
longer-term outlook. We're not a District that's particularly
intensive in manufacturing, but I might mention that the manufacturers
I have spoken with have generally been positive.
One report was a bit
of a surprise and I'll just pass it on:
A businessman with operations
in the Twin Cities as well as in the Seventh and Twelfth Districts
said his business was improving in all three locations. But in the
Twin Cities he has difficulty hiring and retaining entry-level workers
at $6.00 an hour. There's an automatic bump in that to [a wage] in
excess of $7.00 an hour after a year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
phrase in years.

That's the first time I've heard that

MR. STERN. Well, I thought it was interesting. I don't know
that it can be generalized, although certainly the help wanted signs-at least in the Twin Cities--are popping up with greater frequency.

it,"

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
though.

It's not as good as Boehne's "winging

MR. STERN. I'm going to get to the winging it part, the part
derived from our model! With regard to the national outlook, unlike
Richmond, we run a big complicated VAR model.
For better or for
worse, it also produces something quite comparable to the Greenbook
forecast in terms of real growth in 1993 and is even more optimistic
about inflation in 1993. My own views are perhaps a little more
optimistic, at least as far as real growth is concerned. My views are
based in part on the tenor of the anecdotes I've been picking up and

2/2-3/93

-19-

in part just on
the second half
a 3-1/2 percent
like that again

the notion that I didn't see any great aberrations in
of last year and, of course, the economy grew at about
annual rate.
I have a hunch that it can do something
in 1993.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I listen to this, it
really is striking how much variance there is, not only around the
country but within areas. I would say the tone in New England is very
similar in many ways to that in San Francisco. The economy remains
mixed although improved from the first quarter of last year.
Retailers had a much improved Christmas and their inventories are
quite lean now. There are the usual complaints about margins; people
expect to be able to increase margins, and there haven't been the
post-Christmas sales we often have seen in the past. One strong
sector has been the nonbank financial services sector, particularly in
greater Boston. That has had an impact not only on the housing
market, which has stabilized and actually turned up a little, but also
on the commercial real estate market, which also has stabilized.
However, [commercial rentals] have stabilized at around $22 a square
foot, I'd say, for top Class A space, which translates to the space
being worth somewhere around $120 to $150 a square foot; it was built
at $250 to $400 in a lot of cases.
So, there is an adjustment clearly
going on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They doubled [in] New England dollars!

MR. SYRON. That's right. We used to be a manufacturing
intensive District but the manufacturing that we still have is really
soft now, I'd have to say. There's a little strength in some
specialties--instrumentation and that sort of thing--but manufacturing
is not doing well at all. A lot of that [reflects] unique structural
problems.
There are a lot of complaints, though, about softening in
Europe because trade is very important for us. We see a lot of this
restructuring that people mentioned is also going on elsewhere. Pratt
and Whitney, which produces aircraft engines, is in the process of
laying off 10,000 workers, and that is having a very strong impact;
that's nondefense related, but there are other defense cuts in that
area. The cumulative impact of all these things is that in New
England anyway employment is still declining at about a 2 percent
annual rate.
In the states that we have data for we tried to
understand the difference, similar to [the way we look at] the
national data, between the household series and the payroll series to
see if new firms [help to provide an explanation].
A little digging
shows no increase in such things as telephone or electric company
hookups, which one might expect to be associated with new firms
starting up.
As far as the national economy goes, I have little difference
of opinion with the Greenbook. I continue to be concerned about the
export situation. I think none of us understands the full dynamics of
this restructuring process and its impact on prices and employment.
Now, we think in a simple two-sector model a lot of this stuff was
produced in the defense sector and it wasn't entering the measurements
for consumer prices anyway. There's a lot of labor flowing from the
defense sector into the other sectors of the economy, which is
consistent with the decline in real wages we've seen and makes me more

-20-

2/2-3/93

optimistic, actually, on the price front. Really, I'm quite
optimistic on the outlook for prices for some time to come.
Consistent with that, if I had any question, it would be whether we
would see the roughly 130,000 per month increase in employment shown
in the Greenbook. That's the one concern I have. As a final point, I
would say that while I'm very optimistic on prices, we have paid a big
price for this; and that in my mind emphasizes the value of keeping
the gains that we've had. We don't want that to be in vain.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. There's nothing really new or remarkable to
report in the Eleventh District this time except that we have
America's team and their win assures the country of a rise in stock
market prices!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Who are they, the Arkansas Razorbacks?

Arkansas is in the St. Louis District!

MR. MCTEER. It seems to me that the fourth-quarter GDP
report was about as good as it could get. The 3.8 percent real growth
rate got the attention but final sales were much better, at 4.5
percent. And the [individual] categories were good. Not only did we
have strong consumption but investment was even stronger and
government was weaker. About the only way it could have been improved
would have been for exports to have improved a little. And the couple
of numbers that have come out since the fourth-quarter GDP release
have been very, very positive--the durable goods orders and the
purchasing managers report. So, we've got a lot of good momentum
going right now and it's very encouraging.
But we don't make policy looking back at real variables;
we've been making policy looking ahead at nominal variables and the
monetary aggregates. Last year we benefited from strong growth in M2
velocity that more than made up for the shortfall in M2 below the
midpoint of the target range; growth in velocity was in excess of that
difference and we were very fortunate. But while we benefited from
velocity growth looking back, I'm a little nervous about counting on
that to continue over the next year.
It's one thing to benefit in the
past but it's another to count on it happening again. And I think
we're probably on the verge of acquiescing in a near-term decline in
M2 rather than just a slow growth. We've had negative M2 growth in
the past two months in the context of a slowing M1 growth.
So far,
the economy feels okay. But as Governor Mullins put it last time,
we've been running on fumes for a while now, with velocity growth
instead of money growth and with productivity growth instead of jobs
growth. And given the rapid productivity growth that we've been
getting, perhaps we've been too cautious about the potential growth of
the economy. Maybe that potential is at least temporarily higher and
we ought to be a bit more ambitious in the way we're planning to
stimulate [aggregate demand].
It's tempting to call for further ease in this context, but
I'm not sure what ease would look like.
Short-term interest rates
appear low enough. I look at those and see no need to have them any
lower, and there's nothing we can do to push long-term rates down
except to be cautious at the other end. I really believe that if we

2/2-3/93

-21-

eased, we could cause M2 and M3 as currently measured to shrink even
faster than they have been. But if we do believe that, and I think I
do, we need to do a better job of explaining it and selling it to the
public. I think it's dangerous for our future to have the political
spectrum from Milton Friedman on the one hand to Paul Samuelson on the
other bashing us for tight money based entirely on M2 when we could
make the case that slow M2 growth reflects easy money rather than
tight money. We need to figure out what slow M2 growth means and then
either change it or defend it a little. And as far as our public
posture goes, I also feel we're in a bad situation, seeming to
acquiesce in the lack of job growth. I'm afraid we're going to come
across as being satisfied enough to have productivity-led growth in
the absence of job growth. I just worry about what our silence on
that question might do to us.
In sum, I worry about how we are
perceived right now. But as for the economy itself lately, it has
been going strong and our expectation is that in 1993 it will be
But that's winging it!
stronger than in the Greenbook forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I must say that for
the last year or so I've been arguing that the dynamics of the economy
were in large part based on the confidence factors that were present
or not present in the economy. And now we seem to be entering or at
least approaching a new era of good feeling, based on what I've heard
around the table in general terms. This may sound a little too
empirical, but I think a large part of that was based on campaign
promises that began to emerge in the third quarter and that raised a
general expectation that things were surely going to be better. As a
result, economic activity began to pick up in the third quarter and
continued to do so in the fourth quarter, and it was rather a dramatic
change. But the negative factors in the economy are still there. We
have export markets that are a lot tougher than they have been for a
while. We have the defense cutbacks continuing and in all probability
they're going to get steeper. We continue to have this commercial
real estate slack, which is not going to resolve itself quickly. And
we still have the overhang of the remaining resolutions in the
Resolution Trust Corporation. We have this phenomenon of corporate
restructuring, which I believe is a phenomenon of the '90s that isn't
going to go away in just another couple of years.
I think it's going
to continue for some time. And that means layoffs, plant closings,
and CEO executions.
Now, on top of all of the continuing uncertainties, we see a
reneging--or a back-pedalling at least--on some of the [campaign]
promises that were made. We see wobbling on deficit reduction; we see
the job stimulus programs [and other] fiscal programs being cut back
in terms of what everybody was expecting; we see middle-class tax
reductions being talked out of the picture; we even see gays in the
military not going to happen. So, some expectations in almost every
sector of the society have been disappointed or are about to be
disappointed. Coupled with that we have the new and unexpected
threats from the architects of national sacrifice. We have a
discussion going on right now about the possibility of reduced Social
Security COLAs. Now, that sounds like a minor event, but the grey
panthers of this country are a very powerful force and they are a very
important part of the consuming public. We have the possibility of
higher taxes on Social Security income, a move from taxes on 50

-22-

2/2-3/93

percent of it to taxes on 85 percent of it. We may have higher
middle-class taxes instead of reductions in middle-class taxes; we
have the possibility of energy taxes, which really touch every
American where his love is [greatest]--his automobile--and also his
oil bills.
The cumulative effect, it seems to me, could be to reverse
the confidence in recovery that has been so important to this recent
economic performance, and it could choke off all this consumptiondriven growth that we're experiencing. The problem, as I see it, is
that there's probably not a darn thing that monetary policy can do
about it.
I agree with the observations that there is not a lot of
moving room for monetary policy as far as further stimulation to the
economy is concerned. So, even though I feel some of that era of good
feeling, I'm nervous about these other effects out there that could
begin to choke it off a bit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The original era of good feeling lasted

a while!
MR. LAWARE.

Yes, and hopefully it will happen again!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that we're the only game in town
in regard to economic policy, and the only explanation for the
significant rate of recovery that has been under way has been monetary
policy. And that has been occurring in an environment in which the
head wind seems to be decreasing because monetary policy has worked to
strengthen the net interest margin of the banking system, and that
does mean that a great deal of impediments to lending are moving away.
When I look at my forecast for 1992--I know the performance
came in at 3.0 percent Q4 over Q4, which was higher than I anticipated
-- I ask myself why I underestimated the performance in 1992.
And I
think it centers on the fact that I anticipated that the saving rate
would rise more than it did and consumer spending as a result turned
out to be much higher. Indeed, if we look at gross domestic purchases
in the second half of 1990, they were declining at a 3.7 percent rate;
and in the second half of 1992 gross domestic purchases were
increasing at a 4 percent rate. That's a rather significant
turnaround. If we look at real GDP in the second half of 1990, it was
falling at a 2.8 percent rate and in each half-year period since that
time it proceeded to move up from negative 2.8 to negative .7 to
positive .9 to positive 2.2 to positive 3.6. And I ask myself if
monetary policy was successful in generating this accelerating
recovery--though it was very modest at first--what in the world is
going to stop it at this stage? Will it be our interest rates? The
staff is forecasting lower interest rates in what I think are the most
relevant portions of the yield curve, so that wouldn't seem to be a
factor. I must admit that I'm not quite as optimistic on long-term
and intermediate-term interest rates as the staff is in its forecast.
When I look at commodity prices I ask myself, Mike:
How, after so
many FOMC Humphrey-Hawkins [meetings] of having the Federal Reserve's
experimental commodity chart in [your Chart Show] did you happen to
take it out just at the time that the commodity prices are beginning
to show something?
The ex-food, ex-energy experimental commodity
price index shows a rather significant change upward, which for the
first time really goes with the kind of economic recoveries that we
This rise in commodity prices may not be
had in 1983 and 1987.

2/2-3/93

sustained. How could commodity price moves ex-food, ex-energy be as
strong as they are with M2 growth very slow and [recently] declining?
Well, I just don't know how to judge M2 growth, but I do know that
when commodity prices start moving upward it is an indication of
what's happening on monetary policy showing through.
So, the bottom
line is that I end up with a forecast that I guess is the highest of
the lot, or at least at the top of the range.
I end up being slightly
less optimistic than the staff on inflation for the first time since
I've been a member of the Board of Governors.
I've been equal to the
staff's expectation of the CPI but I've never been higher in any
previous discussion.
I do think FASB 106 is still going to be somewhat of a drag
on productivity. But I think there's a modification here in that the
companies that had the high post-retirement medical benefit programs
are the ones that are contracting and the small to medium-size firms
that do not have the generous post-retirement programs are where the
expansion is.
So, I end up with a somewhat lower unemployment rate at
the end of the period. All of this makes me a bit puzzled to be
positioned as I am in relation to the staff, but I'm going to be
honest with you about it and not try to cover it up!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]

To differentiate with other times!

MR. ANGELL. I don't know. I must admit that I really felt
that 4 percent [GDP growth] was quite likely but modesty and restraint
in regard to a drag from net exports caused me to bring that back
down. I do think we need to recognize that the personal bankruptcy
safety net means that this adjustment period for consumers is not as
severe as it was in other long major cycle adjustments. And it seems
to me that that's consistent with the consumer spending that we have.
I, like Bob McTeer and others, worry a little about what we are
targeting. I don't have any appetite for targeting M2.
But the lack
of appetite for targeting M2 does not make me feel comfortable
targeting interest rates as a means of running economic policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Bob McTeer made a reference to
America's team. Being at least in the resident state of the other
side, I have a little different view of that.
But there is something
about the Super Bowl that crossed my mind too, Bob, which is that I
think we're at a point here where we have to be a little careful.
At
the end of the game it didn't matter that a defensive lineman was
cruising down the field with the ball hanging out there and somebody
came along and swiped it out of his hand. Well, I don't think we can
afford to have that happen here, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

If monetary policy fumbles...!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. For me [the picture] is a little
more complicated than I think it is for some others. Clearly, on the
anecdotal side, the tone is better across the board. Big business,
small business, the man on the street, the woman on the street--and
as a matter of fact coming back to Bob Forrestal's point of reference,
even the CEOs that are still on the job in the big companies--seem to
have graduated from flat to modest, if that puts things in a little

2/2-3/93

-24-

perspective. I forget who made the point--it might have been Bob
Parry--that he had gotten some anecdotal reports about surprisingly
strong retail sales in January coming on top of what were very strong
retail sales in the Christmas season. We, too, have heard that. On
the other hand, and several people have made this point, we still are
getting the same message from small and big businesses that this
restructuring has by no means run its course. And some of the
multinational companies are conveying a sense of their experience in
Europe that I translate [as indicating weaker economies there] than
the standard forecast, whether it's our own or the IMF's or the
OECD's. Now, those are obviously not sophisticated forecasting
comments, but I interpret the attitudes of big companies that have
[operations] in Europe as worse than most of these standard forecasts
would imply. If we took our own forecast--and I don't know precisely
what that forecast method is, whether it's a Stern version or
whatever--when I put my own body English on it I end up with a
forecast that you could just about put a postage stamp over it
relative to the Greenbook. They're virtually identical.
But I myself
don't have any real conviction at this point as to where the risks
lie.
On the one hand, I am worried that in part because of the
restructuring and all the rest that even modest employment gains may
not be as readily forthcoming as would seem to be the case. And if
that is not the case, then I think the consumer sector is not a "gimme
putt," even though I appreciate some of the arguments that the saving
rate may have a little more give in it than it might seem just by
looking at the raw numbers.
Similarly, the net exports sector, as
I've said before, is a real risk in part because of this impression I
have about Europe but also because I think there is a rapidly building
financial constraint on our export performance to the developing
world, especially Latin America. So, it wouldn't take a whole lot for
some downside risks [to materialize] that are not inconsequential.
On the other hand, I think we do have a situation where we
see some signs cumulating on the up side. Indeed, if I let my mind
wander a little, I could easily see a 3-1/2 percent growth rate or
maybe more. And that worries me because, while I'm a firm believer in
inflation being fundamentally related in a technical sense to slack in
the economy, we could start to see some deterioration in the inflation
outlook sooner rather than later, even with slack, because I think the
speed factor is still a reality. I don't think the business community
and the economy at large have yet bought zero inflation by a long
shot. Now, putting that together, one could say that's the way it
should be. A forecast should say there is this risk and that risk and
they all tend to wash out. But that's not how I look at it. As a
matter of fact, I feel fairly certain that 1993 will not look like the
forecast. But I can't quite decide on which side is the greater risk.
And I might add that either side has problems.
So, it looks like a
nice easy walk in the sun for the next couple of quarters or so, but
I'm not so sure of that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. John LaWare's comments reflected the kind of
things that I've been hearing over the last couple of months in
conversations with directors and others around the District.
In the
fall, during the latter months of the campaign, there was this
attitude--reflected in the media, of course--that we were not getting
all the government we were paying for, that something was wrong and

2/2-3/93

-25-

nobody was fixing it. And now there's a very sharp increase in
concern that we may in fact get all the government we're paying for
and it's not good. The numbers look not so bad to me. The attitudes,
if anything, have deteriorated. I'm not sure yet.
I have not been in
Cleveland a full year and in traveling around the District I don't
know whether I have to seasonally adjust them; maybe it's simply
impossible to [be optimistic] at this time of year in that region of
the country! We have had very good employment numbers recently. When
I point that out, people say:
"But it's not the right kind of jobs.
It's minimum wage jobs; we're losing high-wage jobs for low-wage
jobs."
We had very good sales numbers in December; everyone was very
pleased by that; they expected sales to fall off in January and they
did not fall off.
Again, there's no comfort in that, but concern that
the pickup still is not sustainable. I look at initial claims
numbers.
In January we were 32 percent below a year ago, indicating a
better job market; but none of the business leaders among my directors
or the labor leader on my board point to any of these things with any
encouragement. The headlines are still dominated by stories of
layoffs all over the District. Maybe it's a part of being an old
manufacturing District that is still restructuring, so the news about
whatever's going on in motor vehicles continues to pervade everybody's
attitude. Even the small businesses do not indicate a willingness to
talk in terms of employment increases. They talk about their
productivity gains and they talk about improving profitability without
price increases, but they do not talk about adding workers.
When I discuss the issue of inflation, and I tend to be on
the more optimistic side [expecting] lower inflation, I'm met with
total skepticism. As for the idea of price stability being where
inflation does not enter into the decisions of people, it is certainly
entering into the decisions of these people. They believe that
inflation is going to pick up. And I certainly haven't had any
success in persuading them that anything can and will be done about
it.
There's an inconsistency, especially among small manufacturers
and [a] few of the large manufacturers outside the motor vehicles
industry where they say they see no prospect of increasing prices in
their businesses. They are not worried about their cost side,
especially from labor. However, they believe national inflation is
going to go up.
In banking, consumer lending was very good in the
last couple of months.

C&I continues to be flat;

there's nothing

there. In fact, some banks are still indicating declines in C&I
volumes. Mortgage lending fell off after the boost in the fall.
When I look at the national forecast in the Greenbook, my
main problems with it are on the [underlying] assumptions.
I tend to
think the inflation outlook is going to be better than the Greenbook.
We probably put a little more weight on the P* kind of relationship
than what's built into this.
But I have trouble with the velocity
assumptions. When I look at the conditions of a year ago versus
today, we were coming off two quarters of very little growth in the
If I look at the yield curve, the components of
second half of '91.
the various aggregates, the M1s and M2s, or the level of interest
rates, I don't see any of the conditions that I think contributed to
the rise in velocity that we had in 1992, so I'm simply not
comfortable with that set of assumptions. That is, if we were to get
the kind of outlook shown in the Greenbook, especially in terms of
nominal spending growth, I think it's going to be associated with
faster growth in money. If we have the kind of broad money growth

-26-

2/2-3/93

that's suggested by the Greenbook, I am skeptical that we're going to
get the nominal GDP growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. I would agree that recent data remain quite
encouraging. Many observers have pointed out that the fourth quarter
was very good--about as good as it could get, as someone said--but
many observers view that as unsustainable. They viewed the third
quarter as unsustainable. There's a preliminary indication that we
may have yet another quarter of unsustainably high growth and could
have a string of unsustainably high quarters for as long as the eye
can see. We really don't have any data yet on this quarter, although
the purchasing managers report was surprisingly strong as were the
orders data for December. The job growth is not evident. I can't
help but believe that with a string of quarters around 3 percent we
will break through into some real job growth. The saving rate
continues to be a concern. The observation that the Chairman made and
Gary Stern raised again about realized capital gains on residential
housing I suspect has something to do with it. Coming from Boston, I
don't speak with recent personal experience of large capital gains.
With the lower long rates, I see the housing market continuing as a
little mini-engine here. Businesses, I think, have gone a long way
toward cleaning up their balance sheets. We still have pretty low
rates and high stock prices and I think they will turn now to capital
spending. And we should see some of the effects of pent-up demands
both from businesses and consumers, the deferred spending. I would
also agree with the Greenbook that inventories appear to be able to
play a supporting role.
There are a lot of uncertainties, and I get some sense of
what President Corrigan talked about in terms of discontinuities. A
lot of the uncertainties focus on fiscal policy. There are questions,
such as how much fiscal stimulus does an economy growing at 3 percent
need. There are questions about the deficit implications of the
Administration's proposal. Also, there are the microeconomic
proposals of the Administration, which we haven't talked about, which
might somehow be worked in through the years. Here again there seems
to be some reason to be encouraged. All indications are that the new
Administration might propose only a modest stimulus program. But just
in the last few days the talk has gone from $15 billion to the $31
billion presented in Mitchell's office last night, according to the
reports. The Administration also seems very serious about deficit
reduction over the medium term. And it is true that long rates have
come down a lot just in the last few weeks. When you look at the
implied 1-year forward rates and the yield curve, I think virtually
all the reductions have been concentrated in the short- and
intermediate-range, suggesting that it is fiscal restraint which is
primarily responsible for the reduction in rates and not the
speculation about the change in the issuance of long-term Treasuries.
Here, too, there's plenty of room for skepticism. First, one would
hope that this deficit reduction package, to pull it along, would be
legislatively linked to the stimulus package. But we still
occasionally hear that [the Administration] would like a quicker
stimulus package. I'm sure they have plenty of people, such as Mr.
Rubin, who understand the importance of that, because I wonder how
well the deficit package will fare if it is a separate stand-alone
piece. More generally, it has to be very encouraging that a

2/2-3/93

-27-

Democratic Administration appears to be willing to take on deficit
reduction, but the jury is still very much out as to this
Administration's ability to get a credible deficit reduction package
through Congress.
Given how the markets have set this up, it could be
very disappointing to the markets and, as Governor LaWare mentioned,
to the confidence that seems to be building. But it could be
especially disappointing to the markets, it seems to me. Of course,
even if we had this credible deficit reduction package and long rates
fell, it's not clear that we should respond by lowering short rates
because we could have a stimulus program in the short-term, the
stimulative impact of a fall in long rates. But the actual fiscal
drag from the deficit reduction would be in the distant future, so
that could total up to a fairly stimulative outlook.
I think our best course continues to be to keep our eyes on
the important indicators of our monetary stance, money and credit
growth, and to respond should those misbehave in either direction for
whatever reason. I will admit that this argument would be more
compelling if those indicators were not misbehaving as I speak or if
we had more compelling [evidence] on what the important monetary
indicators are, because I share some of the concerns that Bob McTeer
and Wayne Angell raised about targeting and trying to explain M2 and
also about depending on an increase in velocity when by all accounts
the head winds have diminished this year.
So, we must make policy amid these uncertainties.
I, like
the staff, took a look at the Blue Chip forecast this time, and I
think Mike Prell has pretty well worked it over. I looked at it for
another reason. At a recent NBER conference, Bob Hall and Greg
Mankiew presented a study suggesting that the Fed should take these
consensus forecasts pretty seriously looking out a year or two because
these [forecasters] have a strong economic self-interest to
incorporate all information in the forecast. And if that forecast is
way out of line with what we expect, we should have reason to pause.
They tried to show evidence suggesting that these consensus forecasts
are very good indicators of the future path of nominal income and that
adding M1 and the federal funds rate add virtually nothing to them
because they already incorporate these variables.
It's a fairly naive
approach, I would admit. But the idea is that they do it for a
living, they've heard and evaluated our public statements, including
all the arguments about velocity, they've observed slow M2 growth,
slow credit growth, fast M1 growth, fast base growth, and they use
econometric models and judgments and come up with a forecast. Mike
has presented that forecast; it's very similar to the Greenbook except
primarily that inflation, instead of trending down as the Greenbook
has it, turns up again and is 1-1/4 points above our forecast by the
fourth quarter. This is not explained by the speed factor. Their GDP
growth is about the same. Their unemployment is a bit lower, but that
can't explain it.
Short-term interest rates are much higher than
we're projecting and real rates are about flat; that answers Bob
Parry. The only thing I would add to this is that the Blue Chip
consensus is indeed a consensus. For 1993 only three of the 50
forecasters see inflation as low as or lower than in the Greenbook
forecast. But it is true that for 1993 10 of the 50 forecasters do at
least see inflation below 3 percent. By 1994 only 2 forecasters out
of 38 have inflation as low as the Greenbook. Only 4 of 38, about 10
percent, project inflation below 3 percent, while 6 project inflation

-28-

2/2-3/93

above 4 percent; two-thirds of the forecasters see inflation as
greater than 3-1/2 percent by 1994. So, it's not close.
The overwhelming majority of Blue Chip forecasters
essentially see about the same growth, about the same unemployment,
higher short rates, and higher inflation. There are many hypotheses;
I won't go through them. Perhaps the best is that they just made
different analytical judgments and they're wrong while we are right.
We have analytical bases to make these judgments. Some might suggest
that they are projecting an upward impact on measured inflation from
some of these Administration proposals for business mandates and
taxes. I think that's not likely this early. Others might suggest
that they are somehow sensitive to the fact that this Administration
has signaled that the number one short-term goal is eliminating slack
in the labor market. But I think what they're probably doing is just
betting the odds, because from an historical perspective 1992
inflation was very good. You have to go back two decades on core CPI
to find a better performance and about a couple of decades, it seems
to me, on overall CPI with the exception of 1986. In the employment
cost index, the wage component was the lowest ever in the 17-year
history of the index. And if you take into account the measurement
bias in the CPI, actual inflation was probably in the 2 percent range
in 1992. So, I think they're saying, given the historical precedent,
that this disinflation trend is simply too good to be sustained in a
growing economy. I'll admit I have no punch line to this analysis,
just as Mike didn't, and I wouldn't overstate the significance of this
divergence. It's probably not so significant. We're likely right and
they're likely wrong. But I would only note, as we wrestle with the
vagaries of velocity and the metaphysical meaning of M2 and M1, that
private forecasters who do this for a living are observing this debate
and looking at all the indicators and projecting that inflation will
be going up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I am more optimistic than the
staff about 1993 and more pessimistic than the staff about 1994. Two
meetings ago I made a comment regarding the difference between the
expectation of fiscal policy and the reality of fiscal policy. I'm
trying to think how an academic would put it delicately, but I think I
got the coefficients right and the sign wrong. I had been
anticipating that there would be an expectation of stimulus without
the reality. Instead, what I think we have is the expectation of
deficit reduction without the reality. As a result we got a fall in
interest rates, particularly on the long end, buoyant attitudes, and
yet no bite from either tax increases or spending cuts. I, as a
gambler, would say that the deficit reduction package isn't going to
happen. And I get that feeling from everyone I talk to inside the
Beltway. I'm not a big believer in conventional wisdom about anything
that happens inside the Beltway, and that's what we're talking about
here. First of all, I think the Administration is sincere. In Mr.
Panetta and Mrs. Rivlin in particular I can't imagine more sincere
deficit cutters. Unfortunately, when we go down the list and compare
it to whom they're going to have to offend, it gets tough. Someone, a
good friend inside the Administration, told me that the February 17th
date was picked because they had to get out of this endless circle of
not being able to find something to cut and it was a way of imposing a
deadline on themselves. Students of political history remember that

-29-

2/2-3/93

Ronald Reagan did this very, very effectively. But that's why we're
having it inside the Administration. If you look at anyone on the
Hill such as the trade associations and the truckers, they have the
xeroxes all lined up to go out as soon as February 17th's speech is
over about how you can't raise gas taxes without putting it into a
trust fund and infrastructure improvement. I'm sure AARP has their
February flyers all ready to go.
Even the recent experience with gays
in the military shows that Congress won; they know it and they're
feeling their muscles. So if I may mix some metaphors, I heard here
today that the deficit reduction train is moving on fumes and Wall
Street is inhaling.
My other fear, Mr. Chairman, has to do with the supply side.
I have some fears about what is happening in that regard. I think the
$10 billion tax number is almost a mind-boggling one--$10 billion more
in tax receipts largely because of expectations of what is going to
happen. To put that in context, $10 billion is about 2-1/2 percent of
all personal tax receipts. But a more meaningful number is that it's
close to 15 percent of tax receipts from people making over $200,000.
Another way of looking at it is that it is larger than the combined
annual gains we would get by putting in both the 36 percent bracket
So, we're talking about big swings in
and the millionaire surcharge.
Second,
fiscal policy in the anticipation of what's about to come.
Labor Secretary Reisch mentioned a minimum wage. That was the first
time I heard that one.
I'd heard of it being indexed but the word [he
used] was "increase."
I think that's a sign that adverse supply side
policies are in the making. Finally, just before this meeting, I met
with Griff Garwood who's in charge of the Consumer and Community
Affairs Division [here at the Board]--this would be a seasonally
adjusted factor--and he mentioned three agencies that want to talk to
I'll leave it
us about ideas that we would not consider good ideas.
at that.
All three of those agencies do not have their political
I remember this from when I signed on in the
appointees in place.
Bush Administration on January 31st. The first thing that confronts
you is a pile of absolutely horrible ideas that are percolated up from
bureaucracy. My sense is that that pile of ideas is not under
So my fears are, first of all, that the market is going to
control.
be disappointed with what is actually going to happen on deficit
reduction. I don't know when that will happen, but when it does I
could see a rise in real rates. Second, and this will be a longerterm effect, as supply side effects take effect growth and employment
gains will become more difficult. And I'm afraid that's going to lead
to increased frustration in the Administration and Congress. And that
unfortunately is where monetary policy is going to come into the
story.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Well, my story is probably going to be a bit
like Larry's, but let me start with the economic situation. Certainly
we have the strongest or best prospects we've had since I've been at
the Fed in terms of growth, production, productivity, and spending.
The financial sector, something we haven't discussed much, does seem
to be in better shape, not just the banking system but the financial
system generally, for a provision of capital. Consumer confidence is
dramatically improved, perhaps stronger than the fundamentals would
imply, which is exactly the opposite of what we were talking about

some six months ago here when we were saying that confidence wasn't as

2/2-3/93

-30-

strong and should be stronger based on the fundamentals. The variance
among the Districts, from what we've listened to in this discussion,
seems to be widening. The report from Bob Parry is that the Twelfth
District doesn't seem to be getting any better. So, that's certainly
a disturbing wrinkle on the economic scene. As John LaWare said, we
still have some of the same continuing drags that we've had in the
past. We're making some progress, but we still have [weakness in]
non-residential construction, the international slowdown may in fact
be worse than even we've been led to understand, the federal deficit
is still there, and state budget constraints are still there.
So, we
have a number of the same kinds of constraints that we've seen before.
As for the balance sheet adjustments that we've all talked
about, we are clearly making progress but I don't think anybody really
knows how much or how much more progress we still have to make. What
is the right amount of debt either for corporations or for
individuals? There is this whole question of operating restructuring
--Si Keehn's macho terminology, or right-sizing, down-sizing, and delayering. We're seeing a lot of it. The corporate executives who are
losing their jobs are certainly affecting all the other corporate
executives who are not and who might be feeling the heat from some of
their boards of directors.
I suspect that is going to keep pressure
in the area of remaining tough on layoffs. Certainly there are some
real things that are driving this restructuring:
the drive for an
increasingly competitive international environment, increased
productivity, and so on. Nevertheless, we've been saying for a long
time that computers were really going to change our lives and now they
definitely are changing our lives and changing the way corporations
are assessing their needs in terms of their work force. And it goes
not only from middle management analyzing these various kinds of
statistics to all of us who are now getting more facile at looking at

the statistics directly, but also to just-in-time inventory
management. We're seeing it even in manufacturing. Somebody, I don't
remember who it was, has labeled this the second industrial
revolution. The social acceptability of these moves in corporate
America seems to be continuing. So, I think we're going to continue
to see those pressures. I think the employment situation remains the
key to the sustainability [of economic growth]; it's certainly what

the market is watching now. People are not watching as much what's
happening with the new growth measures but are waiting more now for
the employment reports. So, that remains a concern. I'm hopeful that
we're going to get that 130,000 a month increase in payroll
employment, but that may be a bit optimistic.

I'd like to follow up on some of Larry's comments with
respect to the new Administration. If you just watch your [computer]
screen for a couple of hours, you can see trial balloons going across
the screen at an increasing rate. I'm certainly encouraged by the
general direction that the new Administration is taking with respect
to trying to address the deficit [and to enact] a small fiscal
package. Certainly the stated goals are something we'd all like to
see happen in terms of jobs, deficit reduction, and even banking
reform. We're hearing some discussion about the need to examine the
regulatory environment. As a former manager I recognize, as I think
we all can, that good ideas are in fact a lot easier to come up with
than actually to get done. I certainly hope that we're going to
achieve all of these things, but I think we have to recognize that
we're still in the trial balloon stage now.

2/2-3/93

-31-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Thank you.

Cleanup hitter.

Cleanup hitter, yes sir.

MS. PHILLIPS.

My gosh, I wasn't last.

I can't believe it!

MR. KELLEY. You caught Norm Bernard's eye too quickly! It
becomes a cleanup hitter to be brief and I'll try to do that, Mr.
Chairman.
I'm comforted, as I think all of us are, by the statistics
in the last couple of quarters. And I certainly like what I'm hearing
from most if not all of the Districts about the tone of things. While
I do feel better, I must say that I can't really get comfortable as
long as this restructuring continues and as long as all of these
structural imbalances are still being worked away. We cited the
literature two or three times here today as we have many times before,
and we've got some problems on our hands.
I think Governor Phillips
The tale is going to be told
hit the nail on the head a minute ago:
in what happens to employment. If we get an adequate number of jobs
in the next few quarters, this [recovery] will probably get going and
be self reinforcing. If we do not, then [the economy] could easily
slide back. And I think it's a pretty doggone close call as to which
way it's liable to go. This leads me to be in the camp of those who
view the Greenbook forecast as being the best bet.
I guess it was
Jerry Corrigan who said a while ago that he thinks it's probably going
to be wrong but he doesn't know which way.
I think what happens in
I
employment may turn out to be [the key to] which way it swings.
will remain concerned about the downside risk until we begin to see
these imbalances and restructuring begin to work their [way] out of
the economy, and I don't see that yet. So, I continue to fear that we
have some downside potential there, although I'm optimistic that we're
going to get over the hump and achieve the Greenbook forecast or
better.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The meeting has come to a temporary
pause and we will reconvene at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow morning. In fact, I
have to read a note that Norm has given me, which says that Bob Parry
has scheduled a meeting of the presidents in room 4001 immediately.
MR. LAWARE.
MR. PARRY.

In five minutes.
Five minutes, okay.

MR. TRUMAN. We have some reading material for the Committee
that we will pass out.
This is what was promised in the last line of
the memorandum that Don circulated. It relates to the last item on
the agenda [concerning the release of confidential FOMC information
and covers announcement practices] and organizational structures of
major foreign central banks. If you have insomnia tonight, you can
read some of this.
[Meeting recessed]

2/2-3/93

-32-

February 3, 1993--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Let's continue
on [our agenda].
Don Kohn will brief us on the long-run ranges for
the monetary aggregates.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring to
the Bluebook in the course of my remarks.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Don?

MR. BOEHNE. Don, I respect your judgment in this a good bit
and I think you've approached it in a reasonable way, given all the
uncertainties.
I wonder, however, if you were debating with yourself
and making the case that M2 might grow several percentage points
higher than you estimate, how would you go about making that case?
MR. KOHN. Well, first of all I'd like to say that I think
our forecast of 2 percent M2 growth in 1993, given the Greenbook
forecast, is balanced. I wouldn't want to leave the impression that I
think all the risk is that M2 will come in higher and velocity will be
lower. I think I'd go about making the case for higher M2 by saying
that as the economy gets going, bank lending should pick up some and
banks should be a little more aggressive in seeking deposits. The
case might also be made by saying that we've had a lot of portfolio
adjustments so far. Time deposits have been running off for a while
and the sticker shock aspect of seeing new low rates on time deposits
should be wearing off, so perhaps an awful lot of that adjustment may
be behind us and only a little more ahead of us. Also, banks have
been rather prompt to reduce deposit offering rates and maybe those
rates won't be coming down quite so much in 1993 as one ordinarily
would think since they've done a lot of that ahead of time. But for
every argument I just made I could make a counterargument.
MR. BOEHNE.

Right.

MR. KOHN. One of the counterarguments might be to look at
the first quarter. We are getting very, very weak money growth; the
economy looks okay. And, if anything, we're going to get our
projections of 7 percent plus velocity increases in the first quarter.
MR. BOEHNE.

Thank you.

MR. PRELL. Could I add a point that Don and I have discussed
many times?
One thing you want to remember is that our money numbers
are conditioned on our forecast. The members' forecasts for nominal
GDP are a bit higher than the ones that were built into this, which
easily could add a fraction of a percent to what you might want to
anticipate for M2 growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Don, I know that table on page 8 is based upon
the new Feinman/Porter model, but there's one thing I would just ask
your opinion about:
Do you find it rather hard to believe that 1/4 or
1/8 point variations in the funds rate are likely to produce such
differences in the levels of real output and prices?

-33-

2/2-3/93

MR. KOHN. No, I don't find it incredible. I think what
happened in putting the simulations together is partly driven by that
model. We've speeded up the changes in long-term interest rates. I
think I noted here two changes in short-term rates. So, a given
change in short-term rates has a bigger effect because it's almost
forward-looking. You could argue that perhaps that's not a terrible
idea although the model hasn't done too badly with this backwardSo, the baseline has the declines in
looking yield curve so far.
long-term rates that Mike noted and actually extends that out. And
then the easier policy has even sharper declines.
So, if that would
add some bigger changes in the funds rate, that has the same real-MR. PARRY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Don, do you have any estimates of what these
money projections would look like if they were adjusted for growth in
the stock and bond funds?
MR. KOHN. We haven't projected the growth in stock and bond
funds.
I think a memo was circulated to you yesterday about last
year, and my rough guess would be that those would taper off a little
over time.
Part of what's going on here--look at the baseline picking
up over the time period--is that the yield curve is flattening and
some of the yield curve effects, of which the bond and stock funds are
a symptom, are ebbing over time. So, I would say we'd probably add a
couple percentage points in '93, maybe a few less in '94, and then see
it ebbing over time as the yield curve flattens and as the portfolio
adjustments have already been made.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Was the chart on velocity that you sent
to the Board members that included the bond funds distributed to
everybody?
MR. KOHN.

I think so.

MR. BERNARD.

Was it, Norm?

Yes, it was.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
opportunity cost figures?

How does that chart look for the

MR. KOHN. Well, when we've been trying to work on this issue
of an alternative monetary aggregate--adding back the bond and stock
mutual funds--one of the problems is defining the opportunity costs
when we have bond and stock funds in there because we've got interest
rates all up and down the maturity spectrum. It's really the
opportunity cost relative to spending, I guess.
It's not clear what
the alternative asset is as one makes the monetary asset definition
wider and wider. So, one of the problems in working with this is
defining a demand function that has prices in it.
Obviously, it's
related to income and spending or wealth perhaps-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would have expected.
MR. KOHN.

That velocity looks so much better than

The old opportunity cost isn't operative.

-34-

2/2-3/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I understand that, and that's the
reason I raised the question.
MR. KOHN. In the back of the Porter/Feinman study, you'll
remember, there is a section about these alternative monetary
aggregates. They found, looking at things like the variability of
velocity and whatnot, that the velocities of the [money] stock with
the stock and bond funds were slightly more variable than M2 and
didn't do as well over time in these Granger causality tests with
income.
But the world is changing over time-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think, as Governor Mullins mentioned,
the check capability of a lot of these funds is a relatively novel
situation, and that may be a relevant consideration.
MR. KOHN. My memory is that that has been developing over
time. There was some capability even back in the late '70s but it has
spread to more and more-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Back then you were allowed two checks or
something; that's per generation! Governor Angell.
MR. ANGELL. Don, on page 8, assuming that the fed funds
targeting is really designed to produce those M2 changes and nominal
GDP changes, I noticed that with a fed funds rate of 3-1/4 percent, V2
is 3.1. And then when the fed funds rate is brought down, eased to 3
percent, V2 moves up to 3.3. When it is brought down to 2-3/4
percent, V2 in a nonlinear fashion moves up to 3.8.
What happens to
V2 if, for example, [the economy is weaker or stronger]? Jerry
Corrigan was saying yesterday that he has this feeling that it might
be stronger. On the other hand, it might be weaker. Suppose we ended
up with a weaker [situation], so much so that the fed funds rate were
taken down to 2-1/2 or 2 percent. What in the world happens to V2 at,
say, a 2 percent funds rate?
Does it accelerate the way it does here
in a nonlinear fashion?
MR. KOHN. Well, there are a couple of things going on here.
One is that there are lags, and it's hard to line things up year-byyear. The other is that velocity is being driven a lot by the longterm rates and the spread. The Porter/Feinman M2 is pretty darn
insensitive to short-term interest rates. So, in effect, if you had a
weaker economy--I'd have to hear the rest of the story, say, in the
Corrigan scenario--and short-term interest rates were lower, I'd
expect somewhat more M2, somewhat less nominal GDP. Maybe you'd have
two offsetting effects on M2; it's hard for me to sort them out.
MR. ANGELL. Okay, what you're saying
really have intermediate rates trickling off a
presume that that would be a scenario in which
are moving downward anticipating the fed funds
kind of V2.
MR. KOHN.

is that since you
fed funds rate, I
the intermediate rates
rate to produce that

Right.

MR. ANGELL. Now, to put another scenario out:
Suppose we
were to have a rather aggressive easing of the fed funds rate ahead of
anticipations of weakness that might cause intermediate rates to move

2/2-3/93

-35-

backwards, as they did after our December '89 fed funds rate cut,
instead of moving with it?
MR. KOHN. You could get a perverse effect on M2,
President McTeer was alluding to yesterday.
MR. ANGELL.

as I think

Yes.

MR. KOHN. In general, I'd expect that the decline in shortterm rates would mean we'd have smaller increases in M2 velocity.
Now, that's what happened in 1992; if short-term rates hadn't been
declining, velocity would have been even larger.
So, if we did have
this perverse effect--if we had short-term rates declining and longterm rates going up--then the yield curve effect would outweigh the
short-term effect and we could get a smaller M2.
It's not clear
what's being held constant here, but for the same number-MR. ANGELL.
Of course, I think we have to keep in mind that
since May of '89 we have had that perverse effect almost 1/4 of the
time we've been easing; other times we've been able to do it in a way
in which we haven't had that perverse effect. Would this be relevant
to the Chairman's Humphrey-Hawkins testimony in some sense regarding
those who argue that the Fed made a mistake because we did too little
too late? One might look back at the lack of perversity--that the
intermediate yield when we were too little too late resulted in better
M2 growth than we would have gotten if we'd been more aggressive.
MR. KOHN. I think the more general point, and one that
Chairman Greenspan has made when challenged on this issue, is that in
a sense we were working through this period with market expectations,
as we discussed yesterday, that had inflation turning around,
especially if you think about the [time around the] middle of the oil
crisis. The Federal Reserve had to be fairly cautious or had to take
account of market expectations when making its policy moves.
[It had
to consider] consequences I think more serious than just what would
happen to M2 growth, but what would happen to long-term rates, market
expectations, and the balance sheet/portfolio restructuring process if
inflationary expectations had gone the wrong way.
MR. ANGELL. In other words, I'm not misreading the bottom
line here that if the economy [developed] further weakness and we
delayed our easing but were forthcoming as the market expected, we
might get better movement in intermediate rates and consequently more
effect on M2.
MR. KOHN.
MR. ANGELL.

I agree with what you just said.
Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Don, at Monday's staff briefing, you mentioned
something that did not come up in your answer earlier to President
Boehne. It has to do with what happens to M2 when there are capital
losses in stock and bond funds. We had an experience of that in 1986.
I was wondering if you thought that might be another reason why M2
growth might in fact be better.

2/2-3/93

-36-

MR. KOHN. Right.
If, contrary to our expectations-contrasting the System's expectations with the market's--long-term
rates were to go up, then we might have some people surprised by that.
We had some evidence of that in 1992 as far as the [unintelligible].
This is a bit in response to Chairman Greenspan about what the
opportunity costs are. Are realized capital gains to be included in
the returns and all that sort of thing?
It's a little hard to see
exactly, but one can make a case I think that those flows slowed down
for a little while, particularly when the stock market and bond prices
I think if there were a major
went down on a few occasions.
turnaround in the market, the initial reaction of investors would be,
of course, "I've got capital losses; these things aren't as safe and
as liquid in some sense of certainty about return as I thought they
were."
Now, the end result would be a steeper yield curve. So, I
think the initial reaction might be [a move] out of stock and bond
funds, assuming both the stock and bond markets were going down at the
same time, for a while and perhaps a little less enthusiasm over time.
But I would have a steeper yield curve in the end, so that would be
working perhaps over the longer period of time a little against M2.
But I agree with your analysis. If we had a major break in stock and
bond markets, I think that would make people think twice about where
they were putting their time deposits.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.
Don, at these Humphrey-Hawkins meetings you
usually show some alternative longer-run projections done with a
forward-looking model, which took greater explicit account of
credibility effects.
I notice you didn't do that this time, but it
strikes me that that might be especially interesting now. Did you do
anything like that?
MR. KOHN. No, we didn't.
I think actually, President
Broaddus, in the past we've done what we did this time, which was to
use the same model but note in the write-up of the tighter policy
scenario that if there were credibility effects things would be
better; we'd have lower sacrifice ratios and a faster return to price
stability. I don't think we've ever done a simulation. Now, we have
done the P* simulation, but given these projections for M2 and the
implied shifts in V*, the P* model, which is on the last page of the
Financial Indicators tables, shows deflation in 1994.
We thought
there would be some internal dynamics.
For instance, if that's what
was happening, M2 growth would be faster if we weren't getting the
shifts somewhere showing this.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JORDAN.

President Jordan.

Reading this and then listening to your opening

comments about this table on page 8 of the Bluebook and where the
economy is, I was struck by the emphasis on how close we are to
potential output or full employment, in part because it reminded me of
some of the discussion that we heard in the late 1970s about heavy

reliance on the gap of potential and NAIRUs and all that. I also was
struck [by the fact that] in this table we get this after just two
years of 3-1/2 percent real GDP growth, [which] suddenly drops to 2.2
percent under the alternative III with the idea that [unintelligible]
after 2 years or so of that kind of growth. It looks rather modest.
In view of all the discussion that we've been having in this group and

-37-

2/2-3/93

discussions among members of the profession, over the last year or so
anyway, about the restructuring that's going on, the information
technologies, the tremendous amount of churning especially in the
industrial sector of the economy, how comfortable are you talking
about potential output or where the NAIRU is?
MR. KOHN. Well, Mike may want to comment on this, but I
think we take account, as he did yesterday in his Chart Show, of an
increased trend in productivity in calculating the potential that's
implied here. Also, as noted in the write-up, there's a sense that
perhaps the NAIRU right now might be restructuring itself; raising the
growth rate of potential might also raise the NAIRU since there are a
lot of people between jobs who need to find jobs.
The matching of the
jobs and the people, which is one of the things determining the NAIRU,
might be particularly difficult right now--especially with the
downsizing in the defense industry and in other areas as well. We
could see more frictions in the job market. We've actually assumed
here for the purpose of these simulations that the NAIRU is 6 percent
for a couple of years before dropping back to the 5-3/4 percent that
we think it was over the last few years.
MR. PRELL.
I think Don has covered the point. We've always
been uncertain; the concept itself is not airtight. But even in
estimating it, one has to [allow for] some considerable range either
with the potential output concept or the NAIRU. But I think the two
are working in opposite directions, as Don suggested. For one, we may
be getting faster expansion of potential output currently but there
are many displaced workers. And experience suggests--from the
churning we saw in the first half of the 1980s in the manufacturing
sector when the dollar appreciated so much and we had what seemed to
be a lot of restructuring in manufacturing--that displaced workers
take some considerable length of time to find their way back into
jobs.
One can see the likelihood of some of this happening again.
That may be one of the reasons some private analysts seem to have this
worse inflation/output tradeoff in the short run. I wouldn't want to
push that far, but I think there is the risk that this structural
element in the unemployment situation now might be a little greater
and that we have effectively less room to run in terms of reduction in
unemployment before we get those labor market pressures. The markets
for particular skills that are useful in this automated environment-people who can do the programming and so on--may be relatively tight.
We can see some of the dispersion in recent wage numbers.
MR. KOHN. It might take a higher real wage to get them to
move from southern California.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Tom.

MR. HOENIG. Don, I've read this and listened to what you
said. One thing that bothers me as we look at these simulations of
alternative strategies is that you've given reasons for and against
why velocity can increase, but this is very dependent upon having the
velocity at a rate that has only been reached, I think, three times in
decades. How confident then can you be on the arguments for why
velocity should continue to be very high?
MR. KOHN. Well, obviously, there's a wide spread around this
[forecast].
As I noted, I think the spread is evenly distributed

-38-

2/2-3/93

around it. I can think of reasons why [velocity] might be even
faster. So, it's not a tight relationship, particularly given that as
last year went on, there was [considerable] evidence that the credit
flows continued to bypass the banking system. The banks are faced
with restraints on growth or at least incentives to keep very high
capital ratios or face increasing costs of regulatory deposit
insurance. That would cause them not to bid so aggressively for
deposits. Businesses and households are both borrowing in long-term
markets. They're not seeking bank credit or thrift credit
particularly, and that's being accommodated as they leave the banking
system and go into the bond and stock markets through the mutual
funds. I think this process will continue, and I'm fairly confident
that under the Greenbook projections for nominal GDP and relatively
flat interest rates, even without necessarily the decline in the longterm rates, that we will have a reasonably substantial increase in
velocity this year--whether it'll be 3-1/2 percent or something else.
I find it much easier to predict an increase in velocity than flat
velocity. There's enough evidence that this readjustment/
restructuring process is continuing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's called the demise of commercial

banking.
MR. KELLEY.
MR. KOHN.

I'm afraid that's right.
And the thrift industry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Don? If not,
let me get started on the round table. As I've said before, I think
the evidence continues to mount that as the result of the policies
we've put in place--wisely or luckily--we are looking at what seems to
be a continued disinflation path. That is bringing the consumer price
index and the general inflation indicators to what I suspect is a
glide down a path to as close to a noninflationary environment as one
can get in the real world. We obviously are beginning to get the
signs that individuals are responding in a way that several of you
mentioned. It's fairly apparent that as expectations of price
inflation in the longer run diminish, we begin to get the
restructuring actions that a lot of companies are undertaking. In
other words, rather than endeavoring to increase profit margins by
moving prices, they are being forced to take it out of the cost side,
which is another way of saying that productivity is improving. As
Governor Angell mentioned the last time, as I recall, we are beginning
to see the effects of price disinflation on output. If one looks at
the characteristics of the way one wants the economy to function, one
wants businesses to be improving their profit margins by taking it out
of the cost side and not moving on the price side. And in that
respect I think that we are on an extraordinary path, as I say
[unintelligible]. Nonetheless, it seems to be working out that way.
That essentially means that if we sit still and do nothing at
this stage, we're likely to be very pleased with [developments] both
on the economic activity side and on the price side. In fact, they'll
be basically related. This raises the very important [question] of
what is the policy role of targets. Targets were imposed on us in the
Humphrey-Hawkins legislation and we have been employing them ever
since, first with M1 and then M2 and M3. We go through the process of
forecasting what these targets are pretty much in the manner Don

2/2-3/93

-39-

described. And for want of a better term, it's essentially a
projection of nominal GDP, and a forecast of the money supplies,
whichever ones fall out from an analytical procedure that strives to
get velocity. While there are some obvious interactions, it is mainly
functioning in that manner. We have looked very closely and have
adjusted policy on innumerable occasions when credit behaved
abnormally, when the money supply behaved abnormally. But I must say
--I don't know about the rest of you--that as far as I'm concerned I
almost never cared in those instances if we were making a judgment
that something was abnormal about where the money supply was relative
to the targets we had put together sometime earlier in the year. And
I think what we're viewing at this particular stage is something which
is basically related to this.
I frankly don't think that whatever
targets we agree to today are going to make the slightest difference
in the way this Committee functions in the next year because whatever
is going on we will respond to it.
What we decide today will be an
interesting thing to look at, but I would be very surprised if anybody
here really is driven by the fact that we are on one edge of this
target [range] or the other.
I may be exaggerating for some of the
people around this table, but I'm not exaggerating for myself!
This leads me to conclude that the target issue that we are
discussing today is not a policy question. It's a political
perception question. Having said that, I then get to the question of
what we know about the perceptions that are likely to happen. The
first thing I ask myself is how good a forecaster are we of what we
now define as M2 with all its components. And I must say that the
verdict on our forecasting capabilities is probably not publishable.
Take a look at how badly we have done in the last year! We have, with
the most sophisticated analytical techniques, veered continuously off
the actual short-term path, which is another way of saying that
monetary policy per se is not likely to make all that much difference
as to where M2 shows up one way or the other. Don suggested that if
we were to lower the funds rate by 1/2 point or more as he put it--I
heard the "more" very loudly--we might edge growth of M2 up 1/2
percent. Well, I submit to you that whatever happens to M2 over the
next year, 1/2 percent is going to be in the de minimis area; no one
could care less. What is going to drive M2 probably has very little
to do with what we do; it will have to do with the outside market
forces because the disconnect that has occurred between bank reserves
on the one hand, and the monetary base, the funds rate, and M2 is
really quite extraordinary.
[In response] to talk that says we can
significantly influence this--or as the phraseology goes that if we
lower rates, we will move M2 up into the range--I say "garbage." The
chances of that are at the lower end of the probability ranges of what
we're talking about.
I don't know where M2 is going. My own guess is
that Don's forecast is as good a forecast as we can get. But I'd hate
to have to figure out what the standard error of that forecast is
because it has to be awfully large on the basis of all the other
things that we don't know.
Having said all of that, I then ask myself:
"What should we
be doing?" Well, we have a statute out there. If we didn't have the
statute, I would argue that we ought to forget the whole thing. If it
doesn't have any policy purpose, why are we doing it? By law [we
have] to make such forecasts. And if we are to do so, I suggest that
we do them in a context which does us the least harm, if I may put it
that way. And that is the reason why I think we should view what we

2/2-3/93

-40-

do today in terms of the perceptions as distinct from policy and think
in terms of policy in a somewhat different context, which we will be
discussing later. In any event, I conclude from all of this that we
probably would be best off by moving the targets down 1/2 point--in
other words adopting a 2 to 6 percent range for M2 and probably 1/2 to
4-1/2 percent for M3, leaving the debt range unchanged for the reasons
Don mentioned. I would have some sympathy for leaving the upper end
of the range for M2 alone. I don't feel strongly one way or the
other. My concern about doing that, frankly, is that it would be
interpreted, I regret to say, as our caving in to pressures from a
number of our friends on Capitol Hill. If it weren't for that, I
could see the logic of it, remembering that we are viewing it as a
perception question not as a policy question. Having been exposed to
at least two [Congressional] hearings and the type of responses that
we got on this issue, I would congratulate our [colleague], Governor
Kelley, who was very perceptive at our last meeting in suggesting
something not dissimilar to what has been going on. As a consequence,
I would merely say that I find the arguments overwhelming for us to do
something modest, define it as a technical issue, not get involved in
the policy questions, and leave it at that. Governor Angell.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, you can count me on board as not
having exaggerated my feelings in regard to [the role of] M2.
I
wholeheartedly agree with your statement. I also agree that it's a
political perception question that we're dealing with here and I'd
like to ask you a question in that regard. Since it's a political
perception question, if we go to a 2 to 6 percent range--which means
we've made a move--and if actual growth comes in below 2 percent, are
we not putting ourselves into a very difficult political situation?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say it depends wholly on what is
happening in the economy. If the economy is doing what it's doing
now, that issue will just fade into insignificance.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If the economy is doing poorly, we're in
trouble even if the money supply goes up.
MR. ANGELL. Well, for political perception reasons, I would
prefer to go to 1 to 5 percent on M2, [lower] M3 to 0 to 4 percent,
and leave the debt range alone. My reason is that in my mind we are
going to take political heat for the 1/2 point [reduction]. And we're
going to take 90 percent of the political heat if we go to 2 to 6
percent that we would take if we went to 1 to 5 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we've already gotten the
political heat at 1/2 point; that's what everyone expects. I think
we're taking on more than we need to; I frankly don't see the purpose
of doing more.
MR. ANGELL. My view is that there's just too much
uncertainty here. Let's suppose we move this range [down by 1/2
percentage point] and the economy is performing just like the staff
forecast and it is not adequate to get the kind of job growth that
politically is desired. I believe that with our staff forecast and
the lack of job growth and a range of 2 to 6 percent, if M2 is at 1.8
percent, we'd be in a pack of trouble.

-41-

2/2-3/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say this.
If we were to go down
a full point, all we would evoke is Senator Sarbanes re-quoting Paul
McCracken's story about that guy who shot a hole in the [barn door].
All I can tell you, Wayne, having been up there, is that it is not an
academic discussion;
This is raw politics
I must tell you that I would feel far more comfortable going
up there with a 1/2 point [reduction] and I wouldn't even mind if we
kept going under that; I don't think that's a particular problem. I
think we would be provoking more noise than is necessary by going more
than 1/2 point, and I must say that I would prefer not to do that.
MR. ANGELL. Okay. By and large in this case, this is your
story in the Humphrey-Hawkins setting, even though I don't quite agree
about the political risk. That is, I would rather face his continued
unhappiness right now when I think we're okay than I would to take it
on the chin a year from now. As far as the members of the Committee
are concerned, if we were to go to 1 to 5 percent or even 2 to 6
percent and if conditions changed--for example, if the velocity
picture changed and other leading indicators were suggesting that M2
ought to be growing [above] the top of the range--I would feel it very
strange not to be able to accommodate such growth of M2 under some
conditions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that.
In fact, one issue
that I think ought to be on the table here is whether in the HumphreyHawkins testimony we should suggest that. How to play it is an
interesting question. But as a policy question, I absolutely agree
with what you're saying.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I'm not going to vote against a [1/2
point] decrease in these rates, particularly in this situation where
it seems to me that what we're doing is backing you up as the Chairman
making a presentation. Even though I like 1 to 5 percent a lot
I feel rather
better, I think in a sense that it's your call.
strongly about it, but at the same time I feel very supportive of your
position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I support what you suggest.
I
think you're right that, given the relative variances coming from
things we can control and things we can't control, there isn't any
policy consequence within the ranges of change that we're talking
about here. I would think in that environment that if we had not
already committed to doing something--I'm attracted by the notion of
doing something modest and the limit of modesty is nothing--I'd
probably do nothing at all.
But I think we have committed to it; and
if we have to pay the price, I think we have to do it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
we caved in.

Yes, doing nothing now would look like

MR. SYRON. Exactly for that reason I think we have to do it.
But I have some sympathy for widening the range to 2 to 6-1/2 percent
because that is consistent with the notion [of how we view] this
number. If we were really being honest about it or if we were
unconstrained--I'll put it that way--from a political perspective,

-42-

2/2-3/93

we'd say, given what we would like to see happen to the economy, that
this number could be anywhere between -1 and +10. That's an
exaggeration, but I [wouldn't] go up [to testify] with the same range,
even though it is a slightly wider range than it was at some earlier
points. Widening the range says something; it's consistent with the
notion that this is a very uncertain thing to think about. And if
we're going to widen it, I think you're right that we're committed to
lowering the bottom band; it would look like we were caving in if we
did not. But I would leave the top at 6-1/2 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think your point is well taken;
this is largely a political decision. Politically, I think we can all
agree that 5-1/2 percent nominal GDP is good, so it won't cause us any
trouble. And I understand your case for lowering the average range
1/2 point. I would suggest a slightly different twist. If I were
going to go out there and with a straight face use these M2 ranges as
a political signal, the signal that I would send is that the first
thing we want to do is to prevent a relapse into recession. And
second, I would want to signal a willingness to prevent a resurgence
of inflation. That adds up to me that what we want to do is cut the
top end to, say, 5-1/2 percent and leave the bottom end at 2-1/2
percent. If we really believe what we're saying about 3-1/2 percent
velocity, then 5-1/2 plus 3-1/2 is 9 percent nominal GDP growth. I
can't imagine anyone seriously thinking they would support a policy of
9 percent nominal GDP. On the other hand, 2-1/2 plus 3-1/2 gives us 6
percent GDP, which is only 1/2 point higher than where we think we
were last year. So, I would say that if we believe the forecast, what
we want to do is maintain the bottom end of the range and cut the top
end of the range.
There's a second possibility and that is that it's not wholly
a political issue. I would recommend the NBER Conference Papers,
though I was not able to attend the conference. Academic economists-it's almost a shock compared to what we're thinking--not only want us
to focus more on M2 and nominal GDP but they actually have quarterly
adjustment processes; [they suggest] that we should look at what
happened last quarter to determine what we should do with money next
quarter. And that is so far from what we're talking about at this
table--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And reality.

MR. LINDSEY. And reality. But given that academic
economists can be our most important constituency when times get
tough, if we are moving that far out of the academic ranges, we should
be a little concerned. I have the numbers in front of me. It was
pointed out earlier that in the last 7 years on a quarterly basis
there have been only 3 out of 28 quarters where velocity has been more
than 3-1/2; there have been only 5 when velocity has been more than 3.
I would think that, if anything, the conditions that led to a large
velocity shock last year are less in place than they are this year.
As President Jordan said yesterday, we've had no big increases in the
narrower monetary aggregates. In addition, there's more bank
aggressiveness, not less, going on. Restructuring has occurred more,
not less, than a year ago. And we've already seen a substantial
amount of CD runoff. So, I would say that if we want to avoid what

-43-

2/2-3/93

Jerry Corrigan was afraid of, and that is an outcome outside our range
of expectations, we'd want to have a range of 2-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.
That's just to throw another option on the table.
MR. MULLINS.

A narrower band?

MR. LINDSEY.

A narrower band.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would support the recommendation
as you have made it.
It seems to me it would be desirable to make 3
points in the testimony. The first is the one you emphasized, that
this is a technical adjustment designed to accommodate a decline in
money demand and, therefore, it wouldn't be expected to produce lower
growth in 1993.
The other thing that might be worth noting is that
the adjustment is really consistent with our prior inflation goals and
doesn't represent any attempt on our part to increase the pace of
disinflation. And, finally, we all have been talking about the
uncertainties associated with this whole exercise, and I think it may
be well just to confront very directly the possibility that M2 and M3
could undershoot even this adjusted target; I'd make that point clear.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I had some similar thoughts, but I would favor
alternative II, though I could certainly live with what you have
suggested. I think some reduction in the M2 range is important.
I
don't think one can emphasize too much this credibility point that you
made and [the need to avoid] any perception whatsoever that we're
caving in to political pressures.
It's not just a question of the
Fed's credibility as an institution. I think it's very important to
U.S. economic policy right now in general that we guard that
credibility. I have suggestions similar to Bob's with respect to
things that could be said. There is the technical issue. I think the
way to deal with Bob's point on inflation may simply be to say
something along the lines of:
"Just recognize the progress that has
been made in bringing inflation down."
That in a sense is a technical
argument, too, that ought to be recognized in the ranges as a
technical point without any implications with respect to rattling the
saber. As to the future, I think Bob's point on controllability is a
good one, as is what you said about controllability; it's something
I've agreed with for a long time.
I think the value of M2 when it was
behaving was never as a target but as an indicator of what was going
on in nominal GDP and not something that we could influence.
I guess
that raises another possibility in terms of things you might say, a la
Steve Axilrod's suggestion, but it might not be a bad idea to point
out at this time that we need to look at a broad range of things:
other monetary indicators, the behavior of the economy, etc.
It's
just a good time to make the point that we're required to set these-you've made this point before--but we look at a broad range of
indicators in making policy decisions. When you said "forget the
whole thing," I trust what you were talking about was that at this
point in time, given the uncertainties, it would be a mistake if we as
the central bank backed away in a long-term sense from trying to
understand the behavior of money and having money in some sort of--

2/2-3/93

-44-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, I was referring wholly to the target

issue.
MR. MELZER.

At this point in time?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.

At this point in time.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not backing away from money. The
financial system is what we respond to.
Money is one of the proxies
we employ to understand that system. We can't get away from that.
It's merely the rigidity of the Humphrey-Hawkins statutory
requirements-MR. MELZER.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would feel more comfortable dropping
them at this stage, but we don't have a choice. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have some
considerable sympathy for the position you've taken and for the
considerations that go into it.
I'll only add two observations. One,
it seems to me that one consideration to lower the range, and
particularly the lower end, is of course that we got 2 percent or so
growth in M2 last year. And to the people who want to attribute that
to us it would be a rather strange commentary if we say that in some
sense we are unwilling to have that kind of growth again this year.
So, I think that consideration suggests that the range ought to go
down. In listening to your discussion, it seems to me that what
you're suggesting, and I certainly agree, is that M2 and the other
aggregates are information variables. We have a whole host of those
variables that we look at constantly. Having some sort of range,
aside from the fact that it's required, is a good idea because we need
to evaluate the incoming information against something. If we were to
follow that approach rigorously, we would establish a range that would
be either centered around the midpoint of Don's forecast and/or would
be centered around a growth that we consider consistent with a
noninflationary environment in the long run. I think both of those
would imply lower ranges than we're talking about today, and I don't
think this is the time to move that aggressively. So, I'm comfortable
with what you're suggesting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. I would support the plain vanilla 1/2
percentage point cut on both ends.
I'm not attracted to cutting the
lower end to 2 percent and leaving the upper end at 6-1/2 percent,
first because I think it appears to be a bit cute. Politically, I
think we would hear about drawing the target out just a bit to capture
that last shot. And I don't think people are too worried about very
rapid M2 growth and our slamming on the brakes right now; they're
worried about slower growth. So, I'm for a plain vanilla, 1/2 point
cut on both ends.
I am growing a bit concerned about this whole targeting
process, even though I'm comfortable with policy. I think we're
headed for trouble because even if the economy performs well, we're

-45-

2/2-3/93

going to show a negative [growth rate for M2 and M3] in the first
quarter of 1993.
And if real GDP is 3 percent, we're still going to
hear the criticism--not just the political criticism but the academic
criticism--that we are holding back the pace of this recovery,
restraining it. This is what we've heard even though we've had two
quarters of 3-1/2 percent GDP growth. I've become a little
disenchanted with trying to explain it as velocity changes because I
think that's not selling especially well. We're simply not targeting
M2 at the current time in the sense that low M2 growth will not lead
to a policy change. We are jointly targeting M2 and velocity, which
suggests to me that we're implicitly targeting nominal GDP.
I feel
much more comfortable with a nominal GDP target than I do with an M2
target, but in some sense we're not revealing the nominal GDP target.
So, this causes a lot of confusion. As this goes on, I think we're
going to have to explore other more structurally satisfying ways to
explain this phenomenon. I like the notion of capturing the
distortion in the other aggregates and, for example, pointing out that
M2 adjusted for the yield curve is growing, M2 plus bond funds are
growing, and M2 and bank deposits are growing; it's only the S&Ls that
are not.
Obviously, I don't think at this stage that we should
All these
consider monitoring ranges or anything like that.
aggregates have problems. But something is going to remain
unsatisfying about a process in which we show very, very low M2 growth
and then say it's sort of okay, we'll make it up on velocity. Again,
for the time being we're on this path and I don't think we can do much
about it except that we should continue to think about it because
we're going to be forced back to the issue.
In the interim, I think
you're exactly right:
The least disruptive thing to do is to take a
plain vanilla 1/2 point cut, which I believe is fully discounted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is one thing we could do to come
to grips with your question and that is to publish a couple more Ms
and put targets on them.
MR. MULLINS. Or we could have monitoring ranges.
I don't
know that we'd want to paper the world with Ms just to try to confuse
the issue!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN(?).

I think Arthur Burns had 7 Ms.

MR. MULLINS.
[Having more Ms] does get more directly, in an
understandable manner, to what is happening in that it involves moving
out the yield curve. And we could actually show that some broader
aggregates would be growing, which might be encouraging. So, I think
we should continue to work on these and supplement our velocity
argument. I, too, have been surprised, even in the academic setting,
at how unsuccessful the arguments on velocity have been even though
I think people can't see behind velocity. It
they're very logical.
might be easier to look at an alternative measure. As you have
pointed out in other settings, there is a distressing shortage of
scapegoats in the political arena.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR.
from on your
around here,
that we know

President Hoenig.

HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I understand where you're coming
proposal and I don't see many options. Like others
I am very bothered by it because we are setting a target
we will not be making any time in the near future. And

2/2-3/93

-46-

that will cause us a lot of grief as those who are pushing us follow
up on this and see that we cannot and did not make it. That perhaps
emphasizes Governor Mullins' point that we've got to find a way to
explain by other means what we're doing or we will be under heavy,
heavy, criticism going forward despite the fact that we dropped the
range down 1/2 point. But it's a 1/2 point that I think we're not
going to make right away and that really bothers me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think Governor Mullins has raised a
very important issue here. And it might not be a bad idea for us to
be thinking about this prior to the next meeting and see how we can
confront this. In principle, in a very long-run sense we really have
been targeting nominal GDP. The trouble with GDP is that it's a very
fuzzy number; it gets revised; and it's always late. We don't know
where we are; it's not forward-looking. And we've always used some of
these financial aggregates as advance signals or informational
indicators of where in fact GDP is going. If the indicators collapse,
one goes back to the original source and looks at it directly. But we
may well be able to find a number of different proxies that we might
want to publish in a supplementary sense. And I will tell you that to
do so would diffuse a lot of the politics because [observers] would
not know what to think at that point.
It's as if we were to drop
small time deposits from M2 and republish it.
People would have a
terrible time [evaluating M2] because the argument as to why it's out
of the range--I don't care what we say as to why it's out of the
range--almost doesn't matter.
They would be looking at a number [that
simply could not be interpreted.]
It would be very tough to make a
judgment as to what really is going on.
MR. HOENIG. You're suggesting that if we dropped small time
deposits out we'd have a fairly fast growing M2, which would only add
more confusion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

That's right.

But we already have M1!

[Laughter]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I will suggest to Don Kohn, however,
that he give some thought to this, and perhaps we ought to spend a
little time at the next meeting in March and go a little further on
this question. I think we'll learn a lot, depending on how the
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony ultimately emerges, and we'll know a lot
more about first-quarter GDP. At the moment my guess is that the
statistical risks of the first-quarter GDP forecast are on the up
side, not on the down side. Remember, we're [now] looking at the
fourth quarter. It looks as if fourth-quarter growth is going to be
under that in the third though, to be sure, the third quarter was
revised down. But the first quarter may surprise us, and that will do
a lot to the configuration of how we are perceived [and] how we
behave. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I would personally prefer a full
point drop in the M2 range to 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent. I think Don
makes as strong a case as one can make for any forecast.
But
obviously there is plenty of uncertainty in forecasting money demand
and velocity, and your approach of 2 to 6 percent would certainly be
acceptable to me. I think the one thing we can't do is nothing. That
would be absolutely the wrong signal. The bond market would punish us

2/2-3/93

severely if we tried something like that.
In that connection, I agree
with Governor Mullins' [comments] yesterday in that I would have some
concern about widening the range.
I think people would perceive that
as trying to have it both ways. And that could do some damage to our
credibility.
If we adopt 2 to 6 percent, Mr. Chairman, it strikes me
that you might want to consider saying something in your testimony to
the effect that the Committee will take a particularly close look at
the current range when we review it at the July meeting. And you
might even go so far as to say that in the current circumstances
there's some possibility we would consider lowering the ranges at such
time. Historically, if I'm not mistaken, we typically have not made a
move on the current range at the July meeting. I know we're
vulnerable to the McCracken kind of story, but it strikes me that in
the current situation, with all the technical problems we face, that
that would not be an unreasonable thing to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I have a lot of sympathy for a number of things
that have been said here as far as descriptions of the way the
Committee functions, [including] some of Larry Lindsey's remarks, Tom
Melzer's, Dave Mullins', and your own comments about it.
I don't
really care at all where the debt or M3 targets are set because, with
the tools available, I can't imagine any action by the Federal Reserve
being influenced by whatever they do. What a central bank does is to
set the discount rate, reserve requirements, and open market
operations to peg the funds rate, letting that be endogenous. When I
look at what actually is done, even M2 does not seem to have any
relevance to what the Committee does or what the [Board of] Governors
does. It would seem to me [reasonable] in the circumstances, [given]
a sense of efficient markets and trying to improve the quality of
information to decisionmakers, to say that we're going to put out an
M2 range but it's not a target at all.
It's a staff forecast and the
FOMC has no intention of doing anything to try to stay within that
range. I can imagine a set of circumstances, without putting a
probability on it, where the yield curve could flatten dramatically,
we could get 1 percent M1 growth and 8 percent M2 growth, and as long
as we were getting something close to the central tendency [of our
forecasts] or the Board staff projection on nominal and real GDP this
Committee wouldn't do anything.

It's inconsistent in my view to say

"Here's a target for M2" and not seek institutional arrangements that
help us hit it.
It's not a target if we don't try to do something to
hit it.
So, why not explain that this is not a target and that we
don't really have targets. We can set up monitoring ranges for M1 and
the base, which might be useful for some purposes [in terms of] where
we think they may fall, but they're not targets for the Committee.
What is a target is either nominal GDP or various real indicators.
And for better or worse, if that's the way the Committee is conducting
its affairs, then I think that ought to be explained.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, as you went through your opening
comments I completely agreed with what you said and how you said it
but, honestly, I thought you were coming to a different conclusion.
thought you made a very good case for leaving the ranges where they
were and not making a change. In a perfect world, frankly, that's
what I'd prefer. But I do understand that we aren't in a perfect

I

2/2-3/93

-48-

world and that there are some political perceptions out there that we
need to deal with. But there seem to have been enough changes since
the correspondence we received indicating that we might reduce our
ranges--and certainly the incoming data for this year suggest that the
numbers are moving even further away from our expectations--that one
could make a case that developments have taken place that make a
change not seem appropriate. The uncertainties are very, very
significant and, therefore, I would leave the ranges where they are.
I'd prefer to keep them where we tentatively set them last July, but I
certainly don't feel strongly enough about it to dissent. Therefore,
I would support the case that you made because you seem to feel more
comfortable in a political context with what you've said, and I'd
support that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Clearly, we have a lot of politics floating
around; a lot of the discussion does seem to center on politics.
Unfortunately, politics is a lot perception, and at some point
perception and reality start to merge. And I worry some about our
developing our own platform for criticism. I think we clearly have to
do something and I think whatever action is taken shouldn't need lots
of explanation. The action should speak for itself, which is one of
the reasons I like the idea of lowering the bottom end but not
necessarily the top end because I think [a wider range] would convey
the increased uncertainty. Having said that, though, [one could] say
that the top end is probably the most irrelevant part of the whole
range at this point. I wouldn't wait until March or until our next
meeting, though, to start discussing in the text that we are looking
at some other types of Ms.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm sorry, what text are you thinking

of?
MS. PHILLIPS.

The text of Humphrey-Hawkins.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The report itself, you mean?

MS. PHILLIPS. The report itself. I might not shower them
with all kinds of Ms, but I think an indication that we have been
monitoring more than just M2--that is to say, we are looking at M2
plus bond funds, plus stock funds, adjusted for the yield curve, and
so on--would be [appropriate].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You mean as a means of trying to explain
the velocity question without getting to this velocity--?
MS. PHILLIPS.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's an interesting idea.

MS. PHILLIPS. One could think of it even as a sort of
surcharge during this period when things are so unusual that it's
appropriate to deviate from looking just at M2 or the traditional
[measures] and to start looking now at more--

2/2-3/93

-49-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What you're suggesting is unbundling the
Feinman/Porter analysis in a way that is more readily describable and
not econometric.
MS. PHILLIPS. Right, understandable! So, I guess my
preference would be President Syron's approach. I probably would end
up supporting the 1/2 point [reduction] but with more explanation or
some monitoring ranges [besides] just M2.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I buy into your recommendation on this.
Given
where we are, I think it's the least harmful way to deal with it. I
would stress the technical side.
I'd like to comment on the broader
issues that have come up having to do with our explanation of the
problems of M2.
I think the velocity approach is a loser. I don't
think it has gotten us anywhere. I view our strength as an
institution as a real world strength:
that we understand markets,
that we have a feel for these, and that we understand institutions.
So I would explain this in English rather than econometrics. And I
think it has to do with long-term and short-term rates and the
diminishing role of banks in the financial flows of the economy. That
to me is the way to do it. And I would hope that you can do that in
your testimony and maybe even elaborate with an appendix.
I would be
somewhat wary, however, of dropping M2 anytime soon even if we thought
it seriously flawed. A better approach is to continue to have M2 but
to get people used to an M2-A or an M2-B and to have several of these
that we can look at over time. Then, as time goes on and people get
used to these, M2-A and M2-B can become M2; but I think we have to get
people used to the change.
If we make definitional changes too
dramatically without these kinds of parallel alternatives, I think we
will run into some real problems. We can make this case better than
we have made it and we can make it in a real world sense. We can use
something else that the eyes can look at and then down the road we can
make the definitional change and the shift [to a new M2 measure].
I
believe it can be handled, and I think we ought to get on with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, first of all I'd like to say
that I appreciate the long-term outlook that has been provided in the
Bluebook; I think it was a very useful exercise.
I agree entirely
with your statement that the setting of these ranges doesn't serve any
particular policy purpose. But we're faced with a statute. If we
were operating in a nonpolitical context, the logic would suggest that
we set the ranges to encompass what we think M2 is going to do.
That's the honest thing to do. Unfortunately, we don't operate in a
nonpolitical context and in my judgment the political considerations
have to be paramount here. Not to do anything would play into the
hands of our political opponents in the sense that they would sense a
victory that might have adverse consequences in the market. So, I
think the compromise, if I can describe it that way, of 2 to 6 percent
I think it would be confusing to everyone to
is the right way to go.
try to fine-tune either the lower end or the upper end of these
ranges. I would do it straightforwardly by a 1/2 percentage point
reduction. I think Governor Mullins is exactly right:
This issue is
not going to go away. And I'm not persuaded that the technical issue,
or the velocity issue, is a salable argument.

-50-

2/2-3/93

Many of the points that have been made are good ones in terms
of your testimony. I would be inclined to stress the performance of
the economy and the improvements in inflation and GDP, notwithstanding
the lower range for M2.
I just don't think this is the time for us to
waste a lot of political capital on this issue. We're going to
continue to get some heat, but I think setting a range of 2 to 6
percent is the best way to [proceed].
Let me say one final thing.
You've taken already a lot of heat; you're going to take some more,
I'm sure. And I would just hope that the Committee would be
completely supportive of you in this because you're going to have a
tough time, I suspect; I think we should be behind you all the way.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you.

Governor LaWare.

I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation for
the reasons that you gave. But I would like to join everybody else in
helping you write your testimony!
[Laughter]
I'd include what you
said this morning:
That if we weren't required by law, we probably
wouldn't be doing this.
I would say that very honestly and directly.
I would call attention to the unusual behavior of M2 and M2 velocity
in the past year or so and refer to it not just as a technical
adjustment but explain what has been happening in very common sense
language.
I'd describe the bypassing of the banking system or
disintermediation and point out that it's disintermediation caused by
low interest rates rather than high interest rates, unlike what people
learned earlier disintermediation was caused by. I'd point out that
other measures of money--the base, M1, and so forth--have been growing
at very rapid rates; and I'd point out that if we make very logical
adjustments, such as adding in stock and bond funds, M2 would have
been in the middle of its target range. I have a draft here that
adjusts M2 for stock and bond funds minus IRA and Keough accounts, and
I don't think
it shows us right in the middle of the target range.
many people understand that. When Milton Friedman and Paul Samuelson
don't seem to understand it, I think there's an economic education
problem out there that we have to deal with! If we don't publish a
lot of Ms at least we need to talk about a lot of Ms. Maybe we should
include an appendix, as someone mentioned, and follow the rule I
suggested to you earlier that we shouldn't even show a chart for M2
without having other Ms on the same page so that they can't be
separated. You might even refer to an earlier period in the '80s when
we had the opposite problem, when the money supply was growing above
the target ranges and nobody seemed to be complaining about that.
So,
I think there's almost a requirement that we do a better job of
economic education.
I realize that we're not going to convince the
critics, but a lot of people watch C-Span and it's very depressing
these days.
But I support your 2 to 6 percent range for M2.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, a 2 to 6 percent formulation
is a slam-dunk for me. But I have to say that I find some of the
discussion around the table troubling on several points. First of
all, as someone who has had nothing but distaste if not disdain for
M2--even when people thought it was good--I'm not quite ready to

-51-

2/2-3/93

accept the point that there is no policy purpose to be served in the
context of this discussion, even though I have no confidence in M2.
But I also find troubling the amount of emphasis that you put on the
point that this is basically a political thing we're talking about
here. I don't agree with that.
I think in the first instance the
choices before the Committee are substantive choices.
They are
choices that in the current circumstances have to be [viewed] more in
a context in which there's a lot of noise in the numbers as well as
elsewhere. But I view this as substantive. And in my own kind of
bimodal risk analysis I think it becomes very substantive, whether one
likes M2 or not, because depending upon how the economy evolves, it
could make a tremendously important difference in terms of both the
perceptions about policy and policy itself. So, as I said, I'm not
altogether enamored by some of the body English that has gone with
this discussion.
I am also terribly concerned about throwing all these Ms out
there. Now, you pointed out, Mr. Chairman, that that's what Arthur
Burns did. Chairman Burns may have succeeded in confusing the
Congress but he may have confused himself because, looking at the
results of policy in that era, I'm not so sure they are something I
would want to be associated with. I think there is a grave danger
that if we get all of these Ms out there--[up to] M27 or something-everybody's going to be happy with one of those Ms but it's not going
to be the same for everybody and we're going to end up with a
convoluted policy. So, I've got to help you write your testimony too,
but unlike almost everybody else I'd keep it really simple.
I think
we have a pretty good story to tell in terms of the whole policy
process and what has happened in the economy. Go back to 1989 and the
fact of the matter is that a soft landing in the economy has been
achieved with a degree of success and precision that is almost beyond
the human mind's capacity to imagine.
I'd rather talk about that than
M27.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I want to say something. In fact, we're
already on that track with respect to early discussions about the
testimony.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I said, the 2 to 6 percent M2
range is a slam-dunk, but I would try to keep [the explanation] as
simple as possible. I would not get into these comments about how
we're going to have to take another close look at this in July; it's
Let's go with it.
just another trap. Here it is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, I can also very happily
support your suggestion and I will do so. We're dealing with large
uncertainties, vitally important unknowables, and we don't use [M2]
anyway for running policy. While a logical case can be made for
various [ranges] that are a little higher or a little lower--one can
be made as logically as another--they are not that much absolutely
different anyway. So, it does indeed become a political question. If
one is not responsible for conducting policy, it's very easy to stay
with the tried and true, or at least with what seems to be the tried
and true. That's done on a very sophisticated basis in academia and
in a much cruder and more simplistic basis politically and perhaps
largely in the media. But we are responsible, and we cannot rely on

-52-

2/2-3/93

what has seemed to be tried and true even though it might silence some
critics in the short run. We know that it could get us in very bad
trouble in the long run; we just can't do that. I'm delighted to hear
comments around the table this morning, and certainly would like to
add my voice, about the need to explain these facts in much more
accessible ways and maybe to use more available and hitherto ignored
channels to get out the story of what we're trying to do, why we're
doing it, and how we're doing. We need to do that in language that's
accessible to the media and the general public and our political
critics and our political friends. So, I think the suggestions that
Bob McTeer and others have made are right. Perhaps we're being forced
into it; we'd prefer not to be there; historically, we may not have
had to do it but that's where we are today. But to return where I
started, I certainly think that your suggestion is as politically
viable a way to project these targets as any other would be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. I propose that we vote on
the following ranges: M2, 2 to 6 percent; M3, 1/2 to 4-1/2 percent;
and debt, 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. Read the-MR. BERNARD. I'm reading from page 22 in the Bluebook or, if
you're using the other form, starting at line 36: "The Federal Open
Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. In
furtherance of these objectives, the Committee at this meeting
established ranges for growth of M2 and M3 of 2 to 6 percent and 1/2
to 4-1/2 percent respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of
1992 to the fourth quarter of 1993. The Committee anticipates that
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases could persist
during the year. The monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year. The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability, movements in their
velocities, and developments in the economy and financial markets."
MR. LINDSEY. Given the sentence on what we're expecting in
regard to velocity, shouldn't we also make it clear that if those
expected velocities come to pass we would expect M2 to be at the lower
end of the target range?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We do that in the testimony as distinct
from here. Call the roll please.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Do we vote for coffee at this stage?

2/2-3/93

-53-

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The discussion we have just had led me
to think about how successful we have been in keeping our discussions
within this group. You recall that up until the last several meetings
we had what I thought was a very difficult problem for discussions of
this group, and I think it's important to recognize that we have been
exceptionally tight[lipped].
In the last several meetings I've seen
no evidence whatever of any comments about the content or anything in
these meetings getting out. And I would particularly advise that we
not become lax, because the ability to be as frank as we have been is
very important for policymaking. If we start to loosen up again, I
think we're going to lose that capability. Having said that, I will
call on Don Kohn to take us to the next stage of our discussions.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I don't see a lot of
short-term policy issues in front of the Committee today, so I will be
brief. I also heard Committee members say that they were militantly
ignoring M2.
I also note that it's crossed out of the table, but if
we could devote about 2 minutes to that--.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Don?

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. My question is not so much for Don
but for Mike Prell; this has nothing to do with current policy. Mike,
do you have any concrete sense as to what this $30 billion fiscal
package is and particularly whether it involves one-time [items] or
[programs] that are going to be with us?
MR. PRELL.
I don't have any inside information on this at
all; I know only what I've read in the newspapers. My presumption has
been, for what it's worth, that if there is an investment tax credit
it will probably be a permanent feature. That's more consistent with
the longer-run growth strategy that was outlined during the [election]
campaign. That has some implication for how big the bang would be in
the very short run. And we've assumed that on the infrastructure what
they still seem to be talking about probably would also be more than a
one-time shot, but in what magnitude I don't know. We've assumed that
would be folded in and just overwhelmed in terms of the deficit
effects by the other things in due course.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
was out of context.

I'm sorry for the interruption;

it

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don?
If not, why
don't I get started. As has been indicated, I don't think there's
very much terribly new here. I do think, however, that we are
beginning to see some evidence that overall investment is beginning to
move. We're seeing it obviously in capital goods; we're seeing it in
residential construction. And I suspect inventories may be preparing
to move, which is important in the sense that when we're asking where
the job growth is coming from and where the income is coming from to
sustain consumption expenditures--unless we believe that the low
saving rate is a statistical artifact and there is at least some
[evidence] that indeed that might well be the case--we really cannot
continue to get moderate real growth unless it's investment-led in one
form or another. Obviously, defense [spending] is coming down and
there's no big element involved on the government side, even with

2/2-3/93

-54-

whatever the Administration has in mind. But I think the reason why
we are seeing some momentum still coming through here is that we
probably are getting a definite investment push, which is spilling
over into consumer incomes and probably is a significant support of
the levels of activity. I do think, as discussed earlier yesterday,
that the turnover in existing homes and the realized capital gains
that are being engendered as a consequence, coupled with the
refinancing, are making a major contribution. But that can't go on
indefinitely; it certainly can't grow.
However, the most unusual thing that is beginning to emerge
is that as a lot of the negatives begin to fall away--as homebuilding
starts to look somewhat more buoyant, as retail markets start to firm
up, as the debt-service burdens seem to be declining--there now seems
to be increasing evidence that the commercial real estate problem is
having a larger macroeconomic effect than I think we fully realized.
There is the issue of the value of these assets in the financial
intermediaries, not only in the banks but especially in the insurance
companies. There is clear and I think increasing evidence that the
uncertain values in these markets are having a major impact on
commercial banks' lending patterns. As I put it in the testimony I
was presenting the other day, the fact that a lending officer or
executive of a commercial bank cannot presume that commercial real
estate mortgages can be unloaded expeditiously at a price that is
reasonably forecastable has been a major factor stunting the growth in
lending, despite the obvious very heavy liquidity of the commercial
banks.
There has to be a reason why lending is as dull as it is.
And while we can argue that it's fundamentally demand that's getting
less and less credible, if you look at the aggregate amount of lending
that's going on outside of the financial intermediaries, there has to
be some very extraordinary reasons why voluntarily the commercial
banks are moving their book capital ratios up as rapidly as they have
been moving them up. One obvious reason is that it's a proxy for
uncertainty with respect to the reserves for nonperforming loans. If
that is the case, I suspect that as the underbrush is being pushed
aside and all the negatives seem to falling by the wayside this hardcore element is sitting there. And, clearly, we're not going to get
any rise in real estate values for years. But the question is: Are
we going to begin to get a market which is increasingly liquid? There
was an article in the New York Times--I think it was Sunday--in which
there was an interesting review of all of the RTC operations. It
discussed the extent to which a number of commercial banks are
successfully unloading some of their dead loans, the non-performers;
and there's some evidence that finally the offering prices of property
are beginning to hit the bids and that we're getting some increase in
transactions. But the [commercial real estate] markets still feel
dead; there's nothing out there. Every time we do a survey, the thing
is barely moving. And I suspect that we're going to find ourselves
dealing with this issue for quite a long while. That's all the more
reason why low mortgage rates, especially in the commercial area,
probably are one of the most important vehicles for policy that one
can look at. I've been trying to push the issue, and with some
success I hope, that short-term stimulus to the extent that it moves
intermediate rates up may well be counterproductive. But, so far as
the general outlook is concerned, this [sector] seems to me to be the
one remaining major factor holding the recovery back and I think it's

-55-

2/2-3/93

not an insignificant one. It's a very small part, obviously, of the
gross domestic product, but it is a very large part of the collateral
for the financial intermediary system and a horrendous part of the
nonperforming loans which are particularly important because
intermediaries are very highly leveraged. And if this doesn't go away
for a number of years--I can't see how it will--at least we can expect
to find a means by which we can get some liquidity into this market.
Even if it happens that the prices are 50 cents on the dollar, I think
we might--while we may not get a lot of construction--very well begin
finally to get some lending in the small- to medium-size businesses.
The employment issue might be taking hold. And hopefully
this recovery will lose all of its head wind, if I may use that phrase
that I've got myself involved in. But as I said earlier, I think that
policy is beginning to look better by the day in retrospect. And I
find it hard to think of any reason why we would want to [change the
stance of policy] over the next 6-week period. But if somebody has
some great new insight, I would be most interested in hearing it.
Governor Angell.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your prescription. I
am very tempted, of course, to believe that we may be falling behind
in regard to maintaining price level targeting by targeting the fed
funds rate at 3 percent. I think all of us know the difficulty of
targeting M2; we've all discussed that. Certainly, there's difficulty
in targeting the fed funds rate. We know that's really no way to run
monetary policy under changing conditions. Also, targeting nominal
GDP poses real political dangers for us because it's just so difficult
to go before the Congress and explain why we like 5-1/2 percent
nominal GDP better than 6-1/2 percent when there's clearly a
relationship between GDP and the unemployment rate. The unemployment
rate at 6-1/2 percent GDP would be more desirable than the one at
5-1/2 percent. So, with Humphrey-Hawkins suggestions that we
[emphasize] price stability as a second to employment and our
knowledge that employment benefits from improvement in the inflation
outlook, I'm inclined to believe that we ought to be thinking about
tightening at this stage. But I just don't have the stomach for doing
it, Mr. Chairman; I lack the courage to be what I think would be seen
as somewhat rash. And it was that prediction of lack of courage on my
part and your part that caused me some meetings ago to suggest that at
some point in time we might find ourselves with the need for a very
large-scale move. If you would turn to Chart 6 in the Financial
Indicators package that Don has provided as he always does--I was
mistaken in thinking the charts were missing from the other document
because they're always in this document--you will see on that bottom
chart for all commodities ex-food and ex-oil a price move that is
somewhat of a preliminary indication of what happened at the end of
1982 and what happened in 1987.
I don't have the courage to vote to
tighten at this point, Mr. Chairman, because I'm hopeful that this
will get reversed. And the price of gold being-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

How much is lumber in there?

MR. ANGELL. Well, lumber was up 43 percent year-over-year
the last time I looked.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
two trading sessions.

And it jumped to the limit in the last

-56-

2/2-3/93

MR. ANGELL. Yes, but of course the beauty of this
experimental ex-food and ex-oil commodity index is that it's not a
[unintelligible] phenomenon with lumber; it [measures] actual house
construction that is moving up and increasing demand; and it provides
an indicator not only of price levels but also of real economic
activity. Now, if you look at the top chart on all commodities, which
is the best predictor of CPI inflation, oil's decline and the behavior
of food prices do not worsen the inflation outlook.
Well, Mr. Chairman, I would prefer the alternative of
asymmetric toward tightness, but I certainly never find myself in the
position of dissenting over the question of symmetry. However, I do
want to call the Committee's attention to what I think is a
possibility of our getting behind the curve by maintaining the fed
funds rate at 3 percent for too long. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. I agree with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman,
but I may require some hand-holding over these next few weeks because
I never dreamed that my first vote on this Committee would be a vote
to shrink M2 and M3.
As indicated on the chart following page 19 in
the Bluebook, there are three alternatives and all of them are aiming
down. And that reminds me of last November when Harvey Rosenblum and
I went hunting. It was the first time for both of us.
We were
novices and our guide was concerned about our safety. The main
instruction that I got from our guide was:
"Always keep your gun
aimed up; never let your gun be aimed down. If your gun is aimed
down, you might shoot a dog."
And I'm afraid we might shoot a dog
here by aiming down. All the alternatives are down, so I guess "B" is
as good as the others.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FORRESTAL.

President Forrestal.

Mr. Chairman, I agree with you.

I would opt

for alternative B and a symmetric directive.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

President Boehne.

President Parry.

I would agree with "B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I agree with "B" symmetric. I would just like to
offer a thought on the earlier discussion about the disaggregation of
M2 or looking at alternatives.
It's just a note of caution.
I think
we ought to do that and see what we can learn. But I would be very
careful about making too much of anything at this juncture. While we
can undoubtedly find one or more adjusted aggregates that we might
like the looks of at the moment, my guess is that in two or three
years, unless we are very careful, we're not going to like the looks
of them. So I would be more than a little cautious about rushing to a
proliferation of Ms at this stage.

2/2-3/93

-57-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you will find that the
enthusiasm we all exhibited got toned down by the Vice Chairman, and I
think advisably so.
President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS.
"B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman. But I would just
like to say that I have a lot of sympathy for Governor Angell's
comments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

"B" symmetric, sir.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

Governor LaWare.

President Syron.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.
In the earlier go-around I was commenting more
on what I think is. Now, to be normative, I will comment on what I
think should be. And that is that we should take monetary targeting
seriously. I don't disregard what Wayne emphasizes about the
commodity index, but I also don't disregard what P* and long-run
relationships between M2 and the price level are telling us. The
latter would suggest to me that we ought to find a way to do something
to avoid a contraction of M2.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KEEHN.

President Keehn.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I favor "B" asymmetric toward tightening, but I
could support symmetry.
I have sympathy for what Wayne said, and in a
sense it was all summed up in the discussion yesterday about our
inflation forecast versus the Blue Chip forecast.
If our staff
forecast is right, 3 percent is probably not a problem; if the Blue
Chip forecast is right, it's probably a big problem. And I think we
have to be very sensitive to that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOENIG.

Governor Phillips.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

Tom Hoenig.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

That is well said.

Governor Mullins.

I support "B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I will vote for "B" symmetric.
I
am thinking about aiming down. It's one thing to shoot a dog, and I
love dogs.
It's another thing to shoot yourself in the foot, which is

2/2-3/93

-58-

a bit lower still. So, that may be a case for "A" rather than "B,"
but they are all down to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

"B" symmetric.

MR. KELLEY.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
symmetric.
MR. KOHN.

"B" symmetric.

I think there's a fair consensus on "B"

Mr. Chairman, what do you want to do about the

language?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Don Kohn has] suggested alternate
language for the operational paragraph on page 23 of the Bluebook.
Norm, why don't you read it.
MR. BERNARD. The alternate language involves the last
sentence but let me begin from the start:
"In the implementation of
policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
In the context of
the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and
sustainable economic growth, and giving careful consideration to
economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater
reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the intermeeting period."
The change would come here,
though the sentence would start the same:
"The contemplated reserve
conditions are expected to be consistent with..."
And substituting
for the rest of that sentence would be "little change in M2 and M3
over the period from January to March."
MR. LINDSEY.

How little is the change?

MR. KOHN. In the Bluebook we had a small plus for M2 and a
small minus for M3.
My guess is that the small plus for M2 has turned
into about zero after the revisions today. That is, we had a +.4
percent for M2 over the two months and a -.7 percent for M3.
Now, I
guess it probably would be about zero for M2 and -.8 percent or
something like that for M3.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. KOHN.

That's little.

That's at an annual rate!

MR. BERNARD. Mr. Chairman, in the paragraph that has to do
with the trade-weighted value of the dollar, Mr. Truman proposes an
updating change given the fact that the dollar is now up something
like 3-1/2 percent. When we wrote this we were looking at about 2
percent. The change would be in line 23.
Very simply it would just
involve dropping the word "somewhat" in line 23 so that it comes out
to "rose on balance over the intermeeting period."
MR. ANGELL.

You have unanimous consent!

2/2-3/93

-59-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
symmetric?

Without objection!

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Stern

Can we vote on "B"

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Incidentally, before we go on to the
next subject I'd like to mention that any revisions in the forecast
that you submitted to [Mike Prell] can be made through close of
business on Monday.
MR. KEEHN. Could I just ask relative to the testimony the
If we are asked
presidents will be giving on the 10th of March:
specifically how we voted on the long-term ranges, given the
visibility this issue has gotten, how do you want us to respond?
I
guess an issue is whether you are going to cover in your testimony
anyway how we decided on that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KEEHN.

You mean the range?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Oh yes.

In fact we're required to.

MR. KEEHN. I know, but are you going to say how the vote
went? What if I'm asked in the testimony:
"How did you vote on the
ranges?"
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
to answer.
MR. KEEHN.
released.

If you're asked, I think you're required

At that point the minutes will not have been

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
other words, it's not--

On occasion that has been done.

In

MR. KOHN. I think in the past Mr. Chairman, both you and
Chairman Volcker have answered whether there were any dissents without
necessarily naming names.
In this case it won't matter.
MR. KEEHN. If you cover that, I think that will be a useful
way of setting the stage for defense.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
have, obviously.

I wouldn't volunteer it because we never

-60-

2/2-3/93

MR. KOHN.

Right.

MR. KEEHN.

No.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I should be able unless--

MR. KEEHN. Well, if you don't say it,
when we're asked and--

it's likely to come up

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The easy way to deal with it if
you're asked, even if the Chairman is not asked, is to say the vote
was unanimous.
SPEAKER(?)

Yes.

MR. KEEHN. If that's all right, I think that's fine.
want to be sure that's okay.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[aware of].
MR. KEEHN.

I just

I think that's the way to do it.

There's no down side to that that I'm

That's my view.

MR. MCTEER. I wanted to ask this anyway but I think it fits
I thought Governor Angell's
in very well with Si's question.
suggestion that we change the language in the directive on the ranges
was a good one. The way it reads now it says:
"The Committee
anticipates that developments contributing to unusual velocity
I think it would support us much better if
increases could persist."
it says "The Committee expects that to persist."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's better handled in the
testimony where we're actually explaining what we're doing.
MR. MCTEER. Do you think there's a down side to having it
reflected in the directive as well?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm not sure.

Don, what's your view on

that?
MR. KOHN. Well, that sort of indirect language is there to
give a sense of the uncertainty about it.
The fact that it suggests
that the Committee expects it but does so in this indirect language I
think gives it the sense of maybe yes or maybe no.
MR. MCTEER. If we're really uncertain, I think we made a
foolish vote.
I think our vote was predicated on our confidence that
it is going to happen.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that is a point.
object to changing it as President McTeer suggested?
MS. PHILLIPS.
MR. MCTEER.

Where is this?
Page 22.

Does anybody

2/2-3/93

-61-

MR. STERN.

Why don't you just change the "could" to "would."

MR. PARRY.

I thought of the same thing.

MR. SYRON.

That's a good idea.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a good idea. Why don't we just
do that; it helps a little. I think you're quite right.
MR. KOHN.
"The Committee anticipates developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases would persist during..."
MR. ANGELL.

How about "are likely to"?

MR. MULLINS.

If we say that, it certainly will not--

MR. SYRON.

"Probably would."

SPEAKER(?).

"Are likely to."

MR. KOHN.

"Are likely to,"

SPEAKER(?).

I like that.

MR. ANGELL.

That's better.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

yes.

It's "are likely to."

"Are not unlikely to"?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now that you have the floor, you're on
for [the next agenda item].
You may recall that we have discussed the
question of confidentiality of FOMC information. We have a very
interesting staff memorandum on this and Governor Mullins will lead
our discussion.
MR. MULLINS. Don Kohn has provided for the Committee an
outline which summarizes the issues identified by the subcommittee and
also gives our tentative conclusions.
It is provided as background to
the Committee

for thinking about these issues and as background for

the Chairman in preparation for Humphrey-Hawkins testimony. It's not
clear exactly what we would like to do with this today except to
inform the Committee where we are. We consider this in some sense an
interim report. There's work left to do. You saw some of it in the
memo, which Ted handed out yesterday, on the arrangements in other
countries. We would also like to do more research and get analogous
information on release issues in other parts of the government,
independent agencies and the like, to get as much background as
possible. We don't yet have that. I won't go through the detail
because it's pretty self-explanatory. The way we conceptualized this
whole area was to suggest that our number one job should be to make
the best monetary policy decisions we could. That is our chief
objective. In a democratic society we should do that in a manner
which is as open as possible consistent with making the best monetary
policy decisions. And to the extent that the process is not public
because we feel that a more open process would adversely affect the
quality of monetary policy decisionmaking we felt that we would bear

2/2-3/93

-62-

the burden for making the case because there is this presumption of
openness.
Now we will look through the several different proposals.
As
you see, the results were that we felt virtually all of them had
problems in terms of adversely affecting the quality of monetary
policy decisionmaking. The one in which there was some possibility
for additional discussion, we felt, was the proposal to announce
actions on changes in the federal funds rate target immediately. Some
felt that would increase the efficiency of monetary policy by making
it easier for the Desk to operate. Others were concerned that it
would reduce our flexibility in very uncertain times and also have an
announcement effect which could deter action. The other thing we gave
a little thought to, but not much--and we would invite thought from
the Committee--was the possibility of other options for meeting the
objective of openness.
Some that people mentioned were increased
press conferences and things of that nature, which may draw more
attention to the policy record. We actually put out quite a bit of
information, although it doesn't get much publicity. We compared [our
practices with those of] other countries; I think they testify a lot
and they probably give more public press conferences.
I've noticed
that Henry Kaufman recently suggested that the President meet
periodically with the FOMC; that was not high on our list. So I think
it would be worthwhile, instead of just taking the suggestions that
Chairman Gonzalez has provided us, for all of us to give some thought
to what else we might do to contribute to the sense of openness.
Also, I would invite Tom Melzer, Ed Boehne, Mike Kelley, or Don to
make any other comments on our process or results.
MR. KELLEY. Let me make one quick comment if I may. As we
consider changing how we do things, I'd say that the discussion that
took place here before the break today is a very, very dramatic
example that we might consider. That was a very important discussion,
a very useful discussion, and one might speculate that it simply would
not have happened if we'd been on some other regime such as those that
have been suggested as possibilities.
MR. MULLINS.

Yes, I think that's a good point.

MR. SYRON. Are we going to have a discussion of "E" at some
point? I completely agree with what Mike [Kelley] just said and it
seems to me that the only thing we might consider doing is the
suggestion labeled "E."
But how will that be pursued?
MR. MULLINS. I don't know; it's up to the Committee.
what did you have in mind on that?

Don,

MR. KOHN. I think the idea was, Governor Mullins, that we
would like to know whether the Committee agrees with the conclusions
on "A" through "D" and then whether the Committee thinks that "E"
should be explored further. And then we would do that extra-MR. MULLINS.

We'd schedule a time to do that?

MR. PARRY. I think this is a good effort and certainly
covers some of the drawbacks of these different alternatives. I came
pretty much to the same conclusion:
That "E" seems to be the one with
the fewest downside risks. One thing I was thinking about, though, is

2/2-3/93

-63-

that it would to me be [ideal] if our actions could be expressed in
terms of the effects on reserve pressures first.
If we then wanted to
be specific about the funds rate, that's fine. But there may be some
time in the future when we'll be focusing on something other than the
funds rate and that will then enable us to move quickly into
substituting any discussion about the funds rate with maybe an
aggregate or something like that. We do, of course, in the directive
now start out by talking about reserve pressures and I think that
communicates something standing by itself and obviously can be
supplemented by [comments on the] funds rate or whatever.
MR. MULLINS.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Let me first say that I think the subcommittee
has done an excellent job of laying out the options and their pros and
cons. And I agree completely with a number of the tentative
conclusions. I agree that if we revive the Memorandum of Discussion,
it should not be released promptly. I agree that any videotaping or
literal transcription of the meeting is a bad idea and I agree that an
expanded policy record with individual attribution probably wouldn't
buy us very much. But I have at least a few questions about some of
the other conclusions.
I might just quickly make three points.
First, I think that immediate release of the operational paragraph of
the directive deserves some further study. It's possible that further
study would show that the benefits are equal to or might outweigh the
costs. For me the strongest argument against doing this, as the memo
makes clear, is that fear of adverse public or market reaction might
make the Committee reluctant to take actions that it should take. On
the other hand, one could argue that it might be helpful in a lot of
situations for the Committee to be able to have a vehicle for
[preparing] the public and the market for major changes in short-term
policy, especially changes in the basic direction of short-term
policy, by being able to move to an asymmetric directive in the
direction in which we expect to move and have that move be visible.
For example, lately a lot of people expect that we will have to
tighten policy at some point in the next couple of years, and it might
be nice to be able to give a less disruptive first signal of that with
a visible move to an asymmetric directive tilted in that direction
before we make the actual move. Let me emphasize that I'm not by any
means convinced that this is a good idea; I'm simply saying that I
think it deserves some more consideration. It has some strong
advantages.
If we did that, we would be releasing all of the decision
information we have and it would deal with the leak problem pretty
categorically. So I think it has a lot to recommend it.
The second point I would make is that I hope we can find a
way to revive the old Memorandum of Discussion, which I remember from
my early days in the System, with a long delay in its release because
I think there's a good bit that can be learned about monetary policy
and about the monetary policy process from scholarly investigation of
a detailed record of FOMC meetings. But as your memorandum points
out, obviously the problem is being able to maintain a long delay in
the release. And if we can't do that, I think we just can't have the
Memorandum. But I would hope that we satisfy ourselves completely
that in fact we cannot protect the Memorandum from a forced disclosure
before we give up the idea completely.

-64-

2/2-3/93

MR. MULLINS. Al, what would satisfy you and make you feel
comfortable that we had adequate protection?
MR. BROADDUS. That's the point. I guess if we had very
specific legislation I would feel more comfortable, but I may not have
thought that through.
It may be impossible to do it and I recognize
that. All I'm saying is that I would hope we think that through very
carefully to make sure there's no way we can protect it definitively.
The final point I would make, and this goes to option "E"
which the subcommittee appears to favor, is that I certainly agree
that it's worthy of further study. But I would simply underline what
the subcommittee itself recognizes:
That there's some risk that this
option would tend to lock us in to the current operating procedure,
which amounts to fairly rigid funds rate targeting, and might make it
difficult to move back to something like a borrowed reserve target or
free reserve target or nonborrowed reserve target, in which case the
funds rate would be noisier. That worries me. Still, if we go with
this option, I hope we would consider that point.
MR. MULLINS.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Have we heard from the Desk on this?
words, have they commented on what the effect of--

In other

MR. MCDONOUGH. We've been in close consultation on the study
through Don. The subcommittee's work certainly had the full benefit
of both Joan Lovett's and my views on the subject.
MR. LAWARE.

Which were positive or negative?

MR. MCDONOUGH. On releasing the fed funds rate [target] we
came down in balance that it should not be done, essentially for the
two reasons cited in the study:
That there can be emergency
situations like the fall of 1987 in which our principal concern is
liquidity and the last thing in the world we would want to do is to
say what the targeted fed funds rate is; and secondly, that it would
be very, very difficult, as has just been suggested, if we started
publishing the fed funds target to ever get away from funds rate
targeting. Those were the two reasons that led us to believe that it
should not be done.
MR. MULLINS.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I was going to speak in support [of the work
done]; I thought the document was very good. My only comment was on
your side comment about Mr. Kaufman's idea. I'm a great believer in
the providence of the President of the United States.
I don't see any
reason why we should have any objection to the President of the United
States meeting us whenever he deemed it appropriate.
I don't think we
should invite such a meeting and I would not necessarily counsel the
President to meet us frequently, but I don't see any reason why we
should not be open to that.
MR. MULLINS.

I doubt that we'd turn him down.

MR. LINDSEY.

I doubt it too, yes.

2/2-3/93

-65-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. MULLINS.
MR. LINDSEY.
reflected that.

Would he come here or we go there?

At the Treasury maybe.
David, I wasn't sure whether your comment

MR. MULLINS.
I think it's worthwhile to try to think of
other mechanisms we might use to contribute to this goal of openness.
And it's not clear to me that meeting with the Administration is
consistent with this topic; it may be consistent with other topic
areas. Governor Angell.
MR. ANGELL. I was very sympathetic to Al Broaddus' statement
and would associate myself with believing that continuing to look at
these tradeoffs is somewhat worthwhile.
In my letter to Chairman
Gonzalez I came down on balance for not having the study, believing
that it was better to end up supporting the position of the Committee
on this topic. But the problem that I had, Al, in terms of getting
there without further study, was whether or not early release of the
directive would tend to cause us to be less likely to go to an
asymmetric directive. And my conclusion was that early release would
cause us to be less likely, but I don't know the [unintelligible] of
the information available and that [unintelligible].
So, I would be
open to the study.
MR. MULLINS.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. First of all, let me say that this outline
helped to identify all of the issues and to focus the discussion.
With respect to option "E," I agree that that's an area that we should
continue to look at.
I'd give some consideration just to making an
announcement if there's an actual action and not making an
And I probably wouldn't go with any
announcement [if there is not].
explanation. At least at this point that's what I'd be thinking in
terms of.
MR. MELZER.
announcement?

What do you mean by an "actual action"

MS. PHILLIPS. An announcement of an easing move, for
example. I'd make an announcement if we were going to change the
federal funds rate or make a big change in the [degree of] pressure on
reserves.
MR. MELZER.
view those?
MS. PHILLIPS.
MR. MELZER.

How about intermeeting moves?

How would you

The same.
Okay.

MS. PHILLIPS. I just see that as less confusing to the
market--to announce when it's an intentional move as opposed to just
being consistent with what was in the previous directive.
MR. MELZER.
said, right?

Okay.

And that's embodied in "E,"

as you've

-66-

2/2-3/93

MS. PHILLIPS.

Right.

MR. MELZER. Okay. I misunderstood what you were saying.
thought you were going beyond what was in "E."

I

MS. PHILLIPS. No, I don't think so. As for the other
suggestions that were made, I think doing some kind of summary of the
policy directive probably would give us a better chance of getting
more coverage because a lot of information does go out and it seems
not to get very much attention.
It's partly just laziness on the part
of the press. If we have a one-pager for them, they'll cover it.
MR. KELLEY.

And we get our own [spin].

MS. PHILLIPS. Right. With respect to periodic press
conferences, I'd give some consideration to that.
I say that but I
don't have a strong feeling about how often and so forth. But right
now our major public forum is Congress and that's a bully pulpit. So,
I think it might just give us a different forum for making a
statement.
MR. MULLINS.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Are you volunteering for the press conferences?
No.

I think you'd be great, David!

MR. MULLINS. Would this be after decisions or after FOMC
meetings or quarterly unrelated to--?
MS. PHILLIPS. What I'm suggesting is that those are the
things [to be considered], like you did with the rest of this outline.
I'm just raising it as a possibility; I don't have strong feelings
about [whether to do it] regularly or periodically. I would urge a
follow-up on the items that were suggested in the appendix:
the FOIA
coverage, the practices of other agencies and the legislative and
judicial [branches].
I think those are all fruitful areas to explore.
MR. MULLINS.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Three points.
One is, as other people have said,
that I thought this outline was very useful to crystallize things.
I'm in favor of further exploration, but I think we need to be
cautious. And this outline process of listing the pros and cons is
very useful to be sure that we've covered most things.
I have some
sympathy for what Al said except that as a practical matter I
certainly wouldn't want to revive the Memorandum of Discussion if we
didn't have legislation [to delay its release].
And I surely wouldn't
want to see legislation just to be able to publish a Memorandum of
Discussion. Finally, I think there is something to be said for
pursuing option "E," along the lines of what Governor Phillips talked
about. I guess my interest in that is somewhat tempered by what Bill
[McDonough] said, but I have a question on that. It's not clear to me
that, say, in the '87 case--if the Desk were doing something that
hopefully was transitory in nature and wasn't a major change in policy
and there wasn't a Committee meeting--that we'd have to go out and
make an announcement that said in effect that because of the
disruption in the markets, etc. we're changing what we're doing. I
would presume that in such circumstance we'd always be able to do
something like that.

-67-

2/2-3/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I'm not sure that we would
necessarily have to indicate a federal funds rate [target] if we
actually were doing that because it always-MR. SYRON(?).

Exactly.

MR. MCDONOUGH. No, we could certainly choose not to. On the
other hand if, as is presently the case, we didn't have the policy of
saying what the fed funds rate target is then there's no issue and no
additional uncertainty in an uncertain situation.
MR. MULLINS. It seems to me that we can have uncertain
situations in which we don't know what the market is like. One
advantage of not having announced something is that the market may
blow through something in very uncertain times. So we do have
marginally more flexibility not announcing. But I guess your point is
that in emergency situations we could-MR. SYRON. I don't know all the details of this but I
wouldn't think in that kind of situation that we'd have a very precise
tight notion of where we wanted the funds rate to be.
MR. MULLINS.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Just a couple of points.
I think a very good
way to handle this whole thing is to study it more. But I have some
real reservations about announcing a federal funds rate [target] for
the reasons that have already been expressed. I think it would lock
us in to that modus operandi.
I wouldn't have any objection to
resurrecting the Memorandum of Discussion, as I said in my letter to
Mr. Gonzalez, provided that we had specific legislation that would
protect it [from early release].
I think, though, that we really
could go a step further. I really don't find any major risk to
releasing the policy record as soon as it can be prepared after a
meeting. It comes out six weeks later anyway. An earlier disclosure
would not really be all that harmful and might very well gain us a lot
of credibility; and it might silence some of this criticism about the
fact that we're not open enough. There are some objections; obviously
there may be some reservation about moving to an asymmetric directive.
But I think the benefits to doing it would outweigh those small risks.
MR. MULLINS.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. I think alternative "E" should be pursued and
looked at more carefully because we are starting with an agreed upon
premise that we should be as open as we reasonably can. And I don't
think announcing an action, whether it's [in terms of] the fed funds
rate or reserve pressure is inconsistent with that; I think it is
consistent with being open. And I doubt that it's going to compromise
our ability to have discussions and come up with reasonable policy.
So, that is one avenue that we ought to pursue pretty vigorously.
MR. MULLINS.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I thought the outline was an interesting piece
for indicating the pros and cons of some things, but what didn't come
out clearly was the ultimate criterion for information that we
provide. Even the purpose of the Memorandum of Discussion [published]

-68-

2/2-3/93

with a long lag is not to foster PhD dissertations but studies that
help improve the execution of policy to achieve ultimate objectives.
And that's the criterion that should be used for announcing whatever.
In the short run it should be that it helps us achieve our two
objectives.
I don't see how announcing the federal funds rate would
In fact, the way the Committee is operating right now, I
do that.
don't see what would be useful to achieve the objective of price
stability.
MR. MULLINS.

Other comments?

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Most of what I would have said has been covered
and I won't repeat it.
I agree with those who find at least some
merit in a variety of these proposals and I think they deserve further
consideration as a consequence. But I am particularly attracted to
your other possibilities under "F," in part for the openness reasons
that we've been discussing. But related to that--and I think Governor
Phillips mentioned this--one of the things that has troubled me in
recent years is that we seem to be in a position of either reacting to
or not commenting on various press reports and interpretations of what
we're up to and why. That was a bigger problem when there were leaks
than it has been recently. Nevertheless, it strikes me that we can
put some of that to rest through vehicles like press conferences,
calling attention to things in the policy record, and so forth. And I
would give some serious consideration to doing that because I think it
would benefit us as an institution.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
conferences?

Would you have scheduled press

MR. STERN. No, I would do it on an as-needed basis when we
had something that we wanted to communicate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but a regular press conference
doesn't automatically suggest that there's some important event. If
we announce a press conference, it has an announcement effect.
MR. SYRON.

An announcement effect of the announcement.

MR. STERN. Well, there's always going to be a transition
problem whenever a new procedure or a new rule is introduced.
Certainly the first couple times we announce a press conference I
suppose people will sit up and take notice and cut positions and so
forth. But ultimately they will come to learn the circumstances under
which we do these things.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
further press conferences.
MR. STERN.
MR. MULLINS.

Then they'll start

[unintelligible]

Well, they won't precisely know their content.
Vice Chairman Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Fundamentally I have sympathy with
all of the tentative conclusions. Now, if we could get the protection
in Freedom of Information Act terms, I could associate myself with
some kind of Memorandum of Discussion type document, but I don't know
if we can get that protection. I also agree that the funds rate

2/2-3/93

-69-

[announcement] may be the most fruitful avenue to look at further. I
don't worry so much about the very short-run problem of a stock market
crash; that I think we can deal with. But I do think that the
slippery slope here is making a conclusion, as I think Al said, in a
context in which that conclusion is dominated by a mind-set that
[involves] funds rate targeting. I don't think it's quite as portable
to other policy regimes and that's the aspect of it that I think has
to be thought about more carefully. The first crisis situation we
could always [unintelligible].
Contrary to Gary Stern and Governor
Phillips and maybe a couple of others, I'm not at all into this press
conference thing. I just don't see how we can turn that into a
winner. The closest institution that I know of to the Federal Reserve
is the Supreme Court. I have some trouble with the thought of the
Chief Justice deciding he's going to have a press conference to
explain a couple of recent court decisions. The analogy stinks, but I
think you do give up something when you get yourself into that
business.
I don't know, Dave, about your own experience but in the
old days, which predated you, the Treasury never did [press
conferences and the like] and then they got into it in spades. But
I'm not so sure what the net effect of that has been in terms of
[enhancing the] credibility of the President and the way it is
perceived. If the Chairman really has something to say, I think he
can always find a way to do it.
Any time he wants an audience Joe
Coyne can get him an audience [with no difficulty].
So I don't think
the Chairman lacks instruments to get [a message] out there when he
wants to.
I think the press conference option is a very slippery
slope. And if it ever slid into the perception that the Fed was
marketing itself in some sense, I think it would be disastrous. And
doing [press conferences] I don't think will cut off the kinds of
[problems] Gary was referring to.
So I am very dubious about that.
But I know that is clearly an area where reasonable men and women can
differ.
MR. MULLINS. Okay, that was very useful. The subcommittee
will reconvene in the future. I guess I heard about the same type of
disagreement [we had in the subcommittee] on the "E" issue on federal
funds rate announcements. That's something we'll take another look at
given the issues that have been raised. A number of issues have been
brought up that were not raised by the subcommittee. Also the issue
of whether there isn't something else we could do, like press
conferences, is worth looking at.
The experience of the Treasury and
others who have gone to that is that it's tough to get [the genie]
back in the bottle. Is there something we could gain in terms of the
perception of the reality?
I think we should take a look at that with
some caution. Again, maybe the early policy record disclosure--the
question there is how early could we do it--would make a difference.
But that would get us into the problem of [using] the asymmetric
directive and things of that nature. We will continue to compile [the
information referred to in] the appendix because I think it is
worthwhile to have a sense of where we fit within the broader context
of other institutions. Another thing we'll look at is the point that
Jerry Jordan raised, which is that another way to look at this whole
area is [to consider] what we could do that would contribute
positively to the quality of monetary policymaking.
[We can see] if
there is anything else we might find useful--as opposed to the way we
looked at it, which was to start with the assumption that openness is
a threat to the quality of monetary policymaking, as it clearly is in
a number of these areas.

2/2-3/93

-70-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. This Committee will stand
adjourned until March the 23rd. We can go to lunch.
END OF MEETING

