TRANSCRIPT
FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETING
September 23,

1993

Prefatory Note
This transcript has been produced from the original raw
transcript in the FOMC Secretariat's files.
The Secretariat has
lightly edited the original to facilitate the reader's understanding.
Where one or more words were missed or garbled in the transcription,
the notation "unintelligible" has been inserted. In some instances,
words have been added in brackets to complete a speaker's thought or
to correct an obvious transcription error or misstatement.
Errors undoubtedly remain. The raw transcript was not fully
edited for accuracy at the time it was produced because it was
intended only as an aid to the Secretariat in preparing the record of
the Committee's policy actions. The edited transcript has not been
reviewed by present or past members of the Committee.
Aside from the editing to facilitate the reader's
understanding, the only deletions involve a very small amount of
confidential information regarding foreign central banks, businesses,
and persons that are identified or identifiable. Deleted passages are
indicated by gaps in the text. All information deleted in this manner
is exempt from disclosure under applicable provisions of the Freedom
of Information Act.

Staff Statements Appended to the Transcript
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations
Ms. White, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 21, 1993

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Tuesday. September 21,

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

1993, at 9:00 a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
McDonough, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
McTeer
Mullins
Phillips
Stern

Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly. General Counsel
Mr. Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. R. Davis. Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,
Simpson, and Slifman, Associate
Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Ettin, Deputy Director. Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan. Associate Director. Division of
Monetary Affairs. Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr.

Ms. Browne, Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, and
Goodfriend, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston, Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Richmond, respectively
Messrs. Judd, King, and Ms. White, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco.
Atlanta, and New York, respectively
Mr. Gavin, Assistant Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Ms. Krieger, Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
of September 21, 1993
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. We welcome our
two new colleagues [at the end of the table] from the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York. I'll ask as a starter:
Would somebody like to move
the minutes of the August 17th meeting?
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. I call upon our Vice
Chairman for nominations for slots now open for Manager for Foreign
Operations and Manager for Domestic Operations.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As is
evident by the fact that we have two nominations, our recommendation
is that we revert to the method which has served the Committee very
well during most of its life, and that is to have separate managers
for the domestic and foreign operations. You'll recall that we have
had two managers except for a very brief period in the 1970s and then
for an even briefer period when I had the joint responsibility. A bit
of background:
We are doing some recasting of our research area at
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and we needed a very capable
senior economist with a strong international background to move in
under Dick Davis and take care of [international] economic studies.
And the perfect candidate for that was Gretchen Greene.
So, Mr.
Chairman, I would like to recommend and nominate Joan Lovett as
Manager for Domestic Operations. Joan is a graduate of Albertus
Magnus College and the New School for Social Research from which she
has an MA. After two years at the U.S. Treasury she has been with the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York since 1968; she has spent most of
that time in the Open Market function although she did also have
experience in the foreign exchange area as well, which I think is
attractive. She has been the Deputy Manager for Domestic Operations.
Further, I would like to recommend and nominate Peter Fisher as
Manager for Foreign Operations.
Peter is a graduate of Harvard
College and Harvard Law School. He's made his entire career at the
New York Fed, originally in the Legal Division where he spent five
years. He spent two years in Basle, Switzerland and was the principal
scribe of the Lamfalussy Report. Then he returned to join the Foreign
Exchange Department and has been responsible for day-to-day operations
for about the last 20 months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I just want to note that Joan Lovett was
not able to join us today because her mother died late last week and
we have Betsy White here as her temporary replacement. Nominations
have been made. Are there any further nominations for either of those
posts? If not, I will ask for a motion. May I have one from you?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL.

So move, Mr. Chairman.

"Aye."

All in favor say "Aye."

9/23/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Opposed?
The "ayes" have it
unanimously. We congratulate you, Peter; and I trust that similar
congratulations will be extended to Joan at the appropriate time.
Why
don't we start off with Peter with his inaugural analysis of the
foreign currency operations.
MR. FISHER.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Questions for Peter?

If

not-MR. FISHER. We need to approve the System's $82.5 million
participation in the intervention operation of August 19th.
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Now, I call on Betsy
White. Although she has been at several FOMC meetings, she too is
making her inaugural presentation.
MS. WHITE.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions? If not, would
somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk since the
[last] meeting?
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's now move on to
the staff report on the economic situation. I call on Messrs. Prell
and Truman.
MR. PRELL.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

Appendix.
MR. TRUMAN.
presentations.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

That concludes our

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd just like to raise a question with
Mike or Ted. We discussed very briefly last night this interesting
path of long-term rates relative to the simplistic model. There's an
interesting question that's implicit in this; namely, that if, in
fact, this is a primitive model, one could postulate that we could
drive the funds rate down to zero, hold it there for a very long
period of time--which we have the physical capacity to do--and
therefore look forward to a significant further decline in long-term
rates. Now, obviously, I don't think anybody here believes that that
process would happen. That raises an interesting question as to
whether the relationships that are being picked up in the model are

9/23/93

basically the result of the fact that short-term rates are generally
perceived not to be significantly out of line with productivity and
that the events that surround the short-term market will eventually
begin to affect the long-term market. And so long as the Federal
Reserve does not endeavor to force the short-term rate away from where
it otherwise should be, that model is merely reflecting the fact that
the same forces affecting the short-term rate will ultimately affect
the long-term rate. But I seriously question whether we can infer
from that sort of relationship any significant policy issue because I
have this suspicion that were we to try to drive that relationship by
monetary policy, we would automatically find out as of that day that
it doesn't work any more.
I was just curious to get your response to
that [issue which I raised in] our conversation last night.
MR. PRELL. Well, I think you hypothesized a situation in
which the consequences are obviously explosive. If you held shortterm rates too low for too long, initially through this term structure
mechanism lowering the cost of capital below the equilibrium rate in
the intermediate- and long-term end, you would generate excess demand
and inflationary pressures. Those inflationary pressures would mount
over time. Something would have to give; presumably at some point
monetary policy would have to adjust in the proper direction. But one
of the reasons I have reservations about the model is that in a sense
it doesn't include a place for people to recognize where things are
headed and to have a more forward-looking response. The latter could
introduce an inflation premium earlier on and tend to override what
this model's formulation would suggest. And perhaps because we didn't
move into those patterns of behavior the model didn't have those kinds
of experiences from which to estimate. So, I grant that this likely
has limitations.
If I didn't feel that, we presumably would have a
significantly different kind of forecast. But the one thing that
gives me pause, as I suggested, is that this model has worked
remarkably well in the past, even the past decade. I noted that it
was fitted over 1958 to 1983, and even during the 1980s when there has
been an acute sensitivity to inflation risks and what had happened in
the past, the model has tracked quite well. Other versions of the
model, with the same sort of formulation, [have also tracked quite
well].
So it has gone through some difficult times and I think it
does capture one element of human behavior, its adaptive expectations
formation as people become accustomed to given rate levels. But I
would agree with you that in the extreme it's likely to break down.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for either
President Jordan.
gentleman?
MR. JORDAN. The funds rate has been unchanged for a little
over a year now. So, it seems to me useful to look back over the
period to see what else has been unchanged or what has changed and in
which direction and to try to make some sense out of it.
In reviewing
the successive Greenbooks in the period since a year ago, one of the
things that struck me was how little your forecast of nominal GDP for
the second half of 1994 has changed. A year ago at this time you
[extended the forecast] another year, so I am curious as to what your
1995 projections will look like once we get those, but that's not my
main question now. The funds rate has stayed at 3 percent and [your
forecast for] nominal GDP growth still is on the order of 4-1/2
percent or a little more for the second half of 1994; that hasn't
changed much even though a lot of other things have changed in the

9/23/93

Then, I see that your estimates of
meantime in successive Greenbooks.
potential real output have been revised up, partly because of the new
benchmark numbers. Actual output has been somewhat below where we
anticipated and it continues to be projected on the low side in '94,
so you've got a bigger gap. There are two essential elements to your
framework. One is that the gap says something about future inflation
and that nominal and/or real interest rates say something about real
output growth. Bond yields are lower than you had anticipated
earlier; I don't know about real rates, but at least nominal rates are
lower. Short rates are the same and inflation [is higher], suggesting
lower real rates.
So, ex ante, one would look at this set of things
and say:
Well, your forecast should have implied that the split of
nominal GDP would be less inflation and more output. Instead, we get
the opposite. We have a bigger gap yet we have lower output growth by
almost a percentage point in 1994, and with that bigger gap we have
higher inflation. I'd be curious [to learn] what other things must
have changed, because other things equal we would have gotten the
opposite. We would have expected more output, less inflation. So,
what were the things that changed in your framework to produce this
combination of higher inflation and lower output for the same GDP?
MR. PRELL. Well, President Jordan, that's the kind of very
complicated question that I'd have to have in writing a week in
advance, I think, to be able to do justice in answering it. I don't
think I've absorbed all of the threads. We do have, obviously, in our
forecast for 1993 a substantially less favorable mix of output
increase and inflation. We've gotten much lower growth than we
anticipated and inflation has been running somewhat higher. Now,
curiously, the unemployment rate has not been higher than we
anticipated; it has been lower, and that needs to be taken into
account as well.
Furthermore, looking at the revised national income
account data and at both the actual growth and our estimate of the
potential growth, the output gap we've estimated tentatively at this
point is somewhat smaller than we thought, not larger. The actual
growth has been revised up more than our estimate of potential growth.
So, in a sense the gap here that is exerting disinflationary pressure
isn't larger than you thought; it's probably smaller. Furthermore, we
had earlier in the year what we view to have been some response to the
surge in activity. We think that is unwinding now, but on net thus
far this year I don't think it has been helpful.
I would really have to review a lot of detail here to be able
to give a better answer to your question, but I don't think our basic
model, in the sense of how this works, has changed. We've had a few
surprises. What I've suggested in regard to the current forecast is
that we see some underlying confirmation here of the scheme that we've
been applying in our forecasting. And that has led us to be a little
more confident that we can extend the disinflationary trend going
forward. And we think that if growth for '95 remained moderate and
unemployment remained close to where we have it, there would be an
ongoing disinflation. But we have not seen quite the favorable
tradeoff that we anticipated, and the slack has been a shade less on
average thus far.
MR. JORDAN. Can I follow up?
more stress on the fiscal package.

I expected you to put a little

9/23/93

MR. PRELL. Well, we don't think that has affected the
tradeoffs here but, as you know, at the beginning of the year we
didn't introduce a fiscal package because of the uncertainties. Then
we introduced one that included fiscal stimulus because we wanted to
follow the President's lead on this.
Ultimately, there was no nearterm fiscal stimulus in the package; in fact, it probably moved the
restraint forward in time beyond what anyone would have anticipated
earlier. And we now have a substantial amount of fiscal restraint in
the forecast damping aggregate demand but not affecting the
unemployment/inflation tradeoff. Well, there are some elements here,
[such as] gasoline taxes; an excise tax impact in a sense gives you a
short-run deterioration in the tradeoff. And there are other things
that have been going on and that could still happen that will tend to
raise the price level in the short run relative to what everyone-MR. JORDAN.
It raises some interesting implications for the
Committee's policy because on the second page of the Greenbook summary
you say "Achievement of this middling expansion path may require
maintenance of relatively low real short-term rates--to counter the
contractionary effects of fiscal restraint, uncertainty about
government policies, and, at least in the near term, slow growth of
foreign industrial economies."
That's a stronger statement--I would
call it advocacy--of monetary policy than we typically see in the
Greenbook. The Greenbook is typically a little more neutral in terms
of an assumption of monetary policy. And if it's the case that the
real output projection is being influenced by fiscal actions, and if
it's the position of the Committee generally that monetary policy
cannot be used to correct mistakes of other parts of the government
sector, and if you advocate a monetary policy in the future that is
different than it would have been in absence of the fiscal package,
then that is saying that monetary policy is being adjusted because of
the fiscal regime.
MR. PRELL. Well, there are two things one could say. One is
that monetary policy can't be adjusted to offset shocks such as a
change in fiscal policy. I don't think there's an economic basis for
that statement. There may be difficulty in doing that because we
can't anticipate with precision what will be occurring without a shift
in monetary policy and there are uncertainties also about what the
effects of a monetary policy change will be. So, all those
uncertainties may lead you to think it might not be desirable to
attempt to engage in fine-tuning. Certainly the Committee over the
recent decade or so has in one way or another repeatedly made the
statement that it realizes it would be impossible to be fully
effective in fine-tuning and that there would be some risks in
attempting to do that.
In terms of advocacy, I would view that statement more as a
positive statement than a normative statement. It simply says that if
you wanted to achieve this growth path, it might require low real
short-term interest rates for a longer span. We didn't advocate that
particular outcome. That's clearly the Committee's decision to make.
[It's up to the Committee] to weigh the risks that might attend the
policy movement or no policy movement here in terms of whether you
might end up with less output or more inflation or whatever than you
desire. We're attempting to be as neutral as possible here by taking
as our essential assumption that the nominal funds rate remains fixed.
We aren't advocating that necessarily; we were just taking that as a

9/23/93

baseline and giving you something you can adjust from based on whether
you feel the risks are different or that the fundamentals are going to
push things in the stronger or easier direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mike, your projection for real personal
consumption expenditures for the third quarter, given the high July
level, implies a decline on average in August and September, if I
calculated it right. Is that right?
MR. PRELL. We have a very marginal increase in September for
PCE. We see a pretty healthy gain in the third quarter because of the
data already in hand. Real consumer goods expenditures other than
motor vehicles seem to be well above the level of the third quarter,
and service expenditures were running very strong early in the summer.
So, we think we have the likelihood of a strong advance there. We see
a flattening out, and arithmetically that works in the direction of a
more moderate increase in the fourth quarter. But we are basing that
on income trends and attitudes and all the other factors that one
might look to in explaining the prospects for consumption
expenditures.
GOVERNOR GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Governor Angell.

Ted, did you have a NAFTA [assumption]?

MR. TRUMAN. We have continued with the same NAFTA assumption
we've had in the past, which has been that the legislation will pass.
We noted in the Greenbook that in light of recent noise, if I may put
it that way, that may be somewhat less of a "gimme" putt than we
regarded it earlier. And we thought a bit about what the implications
of that might be, which largely--at least in the short term--revolve
around the impact on Mexico, not the secondary impact on the United
States. We have seen this year that Mexican growth has slowed
substantially. That appears to us to be a combination of tighter
policies in Mexico in the face of what had been a rising current
account deficit and some uncertainties associated with NAFTA and the
level of capital inflows. Therefore, for next year, on the assumption
that NAFTA would pass, we had moved up Mexican growth somewhat by
about a percentage point.
In the absence of [NAFTA], we regard that
increase in growth as problematic--I think that's the way we put it in
the Greenbook. Moreover, we think there would be some downward
pressure on the peso and, therefore, there would be some drag on
exports for the United States as a result of the failure of NAFTA.
That's about as far as we've gone.
MR. ANGELL. I have two questions for Mike. Mike, when I
look at those interest rate forecasts that you have in place and then
look at the ECI numbers on page I-14 of the Greenbook, I'm wondering
what happens to the pension contributions. For any period in which
interest rates behave as you have them forecast, assuming that before
the end of 1994 there might be some upward pressure on short-term
rates, would that make much difference in regard to the impact on the
ECI if pension plan fundings come under pressure--that is, given some
of the assumptions on rates of return that are built in?

9/23/93

MR. PRELL. Well, we've alluded to this problem in the last
couple of Greenbooks and there has been a great deal more discussion
about this in recent weeks in the press, some of it by investment
banking firms such as Salomon Brothers who have been calling attention
to this issue. It appears that a large number of corporations are in
serious risk of having major underfunding in their defined benefit
pension plans with these kinds of investment returns.
They've been
very optimistic in maintaining high expected returns, [i.e.] in the
assumptions they've used for determining their contributions.
They're
going to be under significant pressure to make those more realistic.
And we would expect that there will be upward pressure on that
component of employment costs. That is not likely to be a gigantic
effect. We don't really have a good enough handle on it to size this,
but we feel there's probably something there that is of significance
in buoying increases in benefit costs. While other items may be
coming down, the overall deceleration seems likely to be limited by
this factor.
MR. ANGELL. At the same time, for persons who are retired or
approaching retirement and are counting on short-term funded
investments, is there likely to be current and continued downward
pressure on consumer spending from this segment due to the fact that
there is a perceived reduction in investment income?
MR. PRELL. I think it's possible. It's also possible--I
don't think we have much evidence, though I've asked a few businessmen
whether they can perceive this--that people may not opt for early
retirement to the degree that they have in recent years because they
may have lowered their expectations about what their assets will earn
in the way of income over their retirement years. I don't think we
can see anything yet in labor force participation data to support this
notion, but things may work in that direction. We may see some
tendencies toward a little less of that 55 to 64 year old male
retirement that we've seen recent years.
MR. ANGELL. The last question has to do with your statement
in regard to substantial fiscal restraint. Substantial wasn't exactly
the word you used but you had some-MR. PRELL.

I might have.

MR. ANGELL. --adjective regarding fiscal restraint. Yet
when one looks at the Congressional Budget Office forecast and I think
even our own, the budget deficit doesn't change very much over this
forecast period. I recognize that a deficit staying around $250
billion would [constitute] a declining percentage of GDP, but I'd like
to have you explain why you call it "substantial" fiscal restraint.
MR. PRELL. Well, the numbers in terms of the unified budget
are distorted by the year-to-year movements in deposit insurance, so
that the drop, for example, from fiscal '93 to fiscal '94 excluding
deposit insurance programs is on the order of $40 billion. If we look
at the NIPA budget deficit numbers, we're going to get something like
an $80 to $90 billion reduction in that deficit over a two-year span
with roughly constant levels of resource utilization. If we look at
the structural budget deficits, while the CBO numbers and the OMB
numbers show a flattening out as we go out several years, in the near
term there are a couple of years of fairly substantial reductions in

-8-

9/23/93

the structural deficit. Our own measure of fiscal impetus, looking at
discretionary components, indicates a significant movement in the
direction of restraint.
I think the direction is pretty clear, but
gauging the economic significance is always problematic. We interpret
things as suggesting that in this period going out through '94 and
maybe well into '95 the direction of fiscal policy is one of
significant restraint.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
Could I ask you to refer back to
the interest rate model that you discussed in your presentation as to
whether there is a policy implication regarding relatively small
changes in the fed funds rate?
If one were to say there would be some
merit in easing, it would appear that the model would say that there
is still considerable bang to the 3 percent fed funds rate buck and
that this will be transmitted over time, as the model suggests, to
lower medium- and long-term interest rates. On the other hand, if we
were to increase the fed funds rate by, say, 25 basis points, does the
model suggest that the change in expectations could have a rather
significant effect on the real economy by restraining investment
because of the effect on medium- and longer-term rates?
MR. PRELL. No. As I said, this is a very simple model; and
a small upward movement is just going to begin a process of altering
the moving average, which in our model reaches back several years.
So, it's not going to have a major effect. I think you have to ask
whether this model is something you want to rely on in reaching a
judgment, though. The other questions are how low the rates have to
go in order to get the outcome you want and how fast do you want to
get there? Do you want to be patient? If you believe that rates
might [move] as the model is suggesting, is that quick enough for you?
Would you rather accelerate the process by cutting rates further,
knowing that ultimately you probably are going to have to reverse
course more dramatically down the road in order to move real rate
levels to something that is more appropriate in terms of the longerrun equilibrium? But a small adjustment, in terms of this model, is
going to be essentially meaningless.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. There is a rather slow decline in the
unemployment rate in the Greenbook forecast and there's no decline
from where we are now.
MR. PRELL.

Right.

MR. PARRY. And you had included an upward revision of the
growth in trend productivity and higher potential output as well.
If
one looks at the growth rates, the real growth rates appear to be
roughly equal to or in some cases below the growth rate of potential.
Why is there such small progress made in the inflation area? I think
you mentioned health care, gasoline taxes, etc., but it seems to me as
though it's surprisingly small progress.

9/23/93

MR. PRELL. Okay, let me address a couple of things very
briefly. One is that, as we are gauging it now, we believe that a
reasonable estimate of potential output growth at this time is perhaps
a shade below 2-1/2 percent. So, it's very close to the growth rate
of output that we are projecting. If that is so, then all other
things equal, one would expect the unemployment rate to be reasonably
stable. There are short-run uncertainties about labor force
If it remained on the weak side, then one might
participation.
anticipate a lower unemployment rate.
If it rejuvenated suddenly, the
unemployment rate could easily go higher. I'd say, looking at various
models, that there is a very slight upside risk on unemployment.
As for the inflation forecast, basically we've had about
3-1/4 percent over the past year for the core CPI.
We see it edging
down to just under 3 percent over the next year or so. This is not
out of line with various models we look at. Some of them would give
more deceleration and some less.
It is a bit less favorable than we
had been hoping a year ago, say, or at least at the beginning of this
year. We remain concerned that there is a certain momentum here that
is supplied by expectations, which still have not adjusted downward
among households, that appear to be in the 3 percent area. We think
part of the disinflation process will be a gradual adaptation of
expectations to that kind of inflation; but in the near term it tends
to keep wage increases a little higher than they would otherwise be.
We think we're in a reasonable middle ground, given the uncertainties
that we feel.
Based on the experience of the past year or so, we
think it would be a little aggressive at this point to lower that
forecast further.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. We've probably talked enough about the model,
but I thought I'd kick it a few times as well. What bothers me is not
just that it's sort of transparently nonsensical and violates enormous
evidence which has been accumulated on the way markets work,
[including] market efficiency. I don't think one needs too extreme
circumstances to realize that the model may capture what is happening
over some period. But it can't be what is happening [now].
I take it
that if we continue to run this model, with the backward-looking
nature of the model, as you say, the long rate pierces 5 percent. And
I've noticed Michigan mean inflation expectations have often been
around 5 percent, so basically it is a real possibility in this model
that it will drive long real rates negative.
MR. PRELL. I would anticipate that if the inflation outcome
is also similar to what we're forecasting, those inflation
expectations would come down. But you are correct-MR. MULLINS.
different than ours.

But the expectations in the market are a little

MR. PRELL. What I'm saying is that as inflation has remained
low expectations have been adjusting and they will continue to do so.
MR. MULLINS. What I was going ask is this:
Short rates
roughly track inflation, so suppose you included with the model some

-10-

9/23/93

measure of inflation and the formation of inflation expectations.
Would that take all the predictive power away from the model?
Essentially what we've gone through is a period of gradually falling
inflation expectations, with a little turn up, but associated with an
upward movement in short-term rates and then a reduction and again a
If you had some model of inflation
gradual [unintelligible].
expectations to see whether this interest rate model has anything
other than that driving it, what would you get?
MR. PRELL. Well, I can't speak to all of the
experimentations done over the years on this.
In the current model,
there is only a minimal role for inflation expectations in the term
structure determination. And it's in [the model in] an arcane
fashion. It is possible that such a model as you hypothesize might be
serviceable, but I suspect that we have experimented enough that this
formulation has proven more robust. I think saying that this model is
nonsensical and totally at odds with reality runs up against the point
that it does contain some very basic notions that people have talked
about theoretically for a long time, and it has worked. But I don't
want to push that too far.
MR. MULLINS. The reason I say it's nonsensical is because it
doesn't make logical sense. You know you can take the short rate to
zero and it's not going to work. You get ridiculous answers out of
the model.
MR. PRELL.

Indeed.

MR. MULLINS. Plus there appears to be a lack of evidence on
the way markets incorporate the data that are available, which makes
one think that what it is picking up is some other process. When one
hears what people talk about when they set long rates, they talk a lot
about inflation over long periods of time. So perhaps it is somehow
capturing that process. It may be a good model which implicitly is
capturing this inflation expectations process.
It seems to me a
little questionable when we start to reach these levels; when you
project that going forward for a couple more years, you run the danger
of getting pretty interesting [results].
MR. PRELL. Let me say a couple of things. One is that a 5
percent long-term rate, with inflation moving below 3 percent and a
short-term rate around 3 percent, still looks like a high long-term
rate if you go back to the early 1960s. Now, if that's what people
were thinking, perhaps about 3 to 4 percent inflation for the next X
years--they were probably thinking 1 or 2 percent [in real terms]
which is not inconceivable-MR. MULLINS. Of course, it's not inconceivable if we get
inflation down to the level that we had in the early '60s, which was 1
percent on the measured CPI.
MR. PRELL.
percent long rate.

But in that case you'd be looking maybe for a 4

MR. MULLINS. Yes, then you can move that rate on down.
would just say that it's not clear that is what is driving--

I

9/23/93

-11-

MR. PRELL. Well, to take minor issue with that, I think that
perhaps is embodied even in some of your recent comments about what
has been happening with the way investors have been moving into the
I think it's very much compatible.
stock and bond funds.
MR. MULLINS.
the opposite?

Well, why is it that all the survey data show

MR. PRELL. Those people are not necessarily thinking in any
precise way about what inflation will be doing over the next 10 years.
They're saying "I just can't stay with these 3 percent rates forever."
They are saying here that maybe [rates] aren't going to go back up,
and they shift out [of CDs and the like].
The model doesn't precisely
specify the psychology, but it's compatible.
MR. MULLINS. But that's another theory that I don't know if
we want to get into as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We don't.

MR. MULLINS.
I knew you were going to say that! The only
other thing I would say is that if you look at the '70s, a period in
which perhaps short rates weren't appropriately set to track
inflation, you might separate what was going on to see whether it was
a formation of inflation expectations or this backward-looking model.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Short data question:
Coming back to what Bob
Parry asked about inflation, these mandated programs come and go and
are going to affect inflation--or inflict inflation, however one wants
to say it. Do you have a meaningful number, if I can put it that way,
in your forecast for that stuff now? Or is it just below the
[unintelligible] in terms of being-MR. PRELL. Well, cumulatively, it's conceivable that it's
non-negligible. A number of things have happened over recent years
where we've had various mandates that have added to the cost of
production in one way or another or circumscribed supply. But whether
those things have been increasing in size on a trajectory that means
faster inflation in recent years is very hard to say.
MR. SYRON.

I meant prospectively.

MR. PRELL. Prospectively the same thing would hold. The big
issue hanging out there clearly is health insurance. And we have not
made an assumption on that in this forecast, in part because we've not
yet ventured beyond 1994.
I grant that we need to before very long
because of the necessities of monetary policy strategizing. But I
don't expect that a program will be in place before the end of 1994.
And it is likely to be phased in over several years in terms of the
various costs. So, whether it will show up as a sudden large boost to
costs isn't clear. I'm reminded of another thing we had in our
earlier forecast, based on some trial balloons or whatever, and we've
taken it out, which is a minimum wage increase. The kind of minimum
wage increase that is being discussed is only going to have a very
small effect if implemented in 1994, maybe one-tenth of a percent.

-12-

9/23/93

MR. SYRON.

And the environmental stuff is all

[measureable]?

MR. PRELL. It's partly that [such costs] aren't readily
measurable in terms of their aggregate price effects. A bunch of
little things have come along, all of which may tend to increase costs
and in some cases are perhaps affecting the willingness of employers
to take on full-time workers and so on. So, there are broad effects.
And one of the reasons we have this rather subdued view of aggregate
demand going forward is the thought that there will be a continuing
burden of worry in the business community and among households about
what government mandates may do to them over the years.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for either
gentleman? If not, who would like to start the Committee discussion?
President Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, for the last
several meetings I have been reporting that economic activity in the
Sixth District has been outperforming the rest of the country. That
is no longer the case because we are now seeing some deceleration in
economic activity, and there now is a convergence of the District and
national economies. As I've said earlier, our performance during this
expansion has been based mainly on housing-related activity; and as
the housing cycle matures, the stimulus is tapering off.
Retail sales
have also been quite disappointing in the District, and that's across
the board, even though we've had a continuation of rebuilding from the
But retailers now are reporting
hurricane and that's still positive.
poor sales at the end of the summer, and they're very cautious in
their orders for the holiday season. On the other hand, auto sales
have been quite good; the only constraint really to auto sales has
been the lack of supply. Inventories have been low due to the fact
that the 1994 models have been late in arriving and most of the
So, auto sales would have been
dealers are sold out of 1993 cars.
better if the supply had been greater.
Tourism and business travel in the District remain quite
Our hotel bookings and
strong, and Atlanta is doing especially well.
air travel are at their highest level in three or four years.
Florida, obviously, is very concerned about the tourism industry due
to the tragic events that have occurred not only during the past
couple of weeks with respect to foreign tourists but throughout the
year. And since this is a $60 billion industry in the state, I think
that concern is quite well placed. It goes beyond tourism actually,
because there is concern in light of the adverse press reports that
this will affect relocations both of businesses and retirees.
Factory activity was mixed as the summer drew to a close.
There has been some seasonal increase but nondurables and consumer
paper products are quite soft. And manufacturers indicate that
consumer demand has been quite sluggish. Real estate activity also is
mixed. The residential side has been quite healthy. In the singlefamily sector we're seeing more building of spec houses than we had
earlier. The multifamily sector remains in the doldrums and
commercial construction is still soft, although we do notice in many
of the cities of the Southeast, particularly Atlanta, that there is
some absorption of space. But at the same time the lease rates are
pretty low and that's not encouraging any speculative building. The
employers that we talk to around the District report no upward

9/23/93

-13-

pressure on wages, although there is concern about benefits and, of
course, about the health care program. Prices of raw materials and
finished products are steady, although lumber prices have started to
rise again. In the energy sector, we've had some increase in the rig
count, which is good for the economy of Louisiana. On the
agricultural side, the drought has been quite severe in the Southeast
although not quite as bad in our District, I think, as in the Fifth
District. There has been an estimated loss of about $230 million;
that's basically affecting the corn, tobacco, and peanut crops.
We had a meeting of our Small Business and Agriculture
Advisory Council last week and the small business people continue to
complain, rather bitterly I might say, about the lack of credit
availability. They now say they are not even talking to their banks
anymore but are trying to use nonbank sources of funds, including
their own internal fund development. The farmers, on the other hand,
say the banks are quite aggressive in trying to get agricultural
loans, so they're not having any trouble at all in finding credit.
Finally, with respect to the District, I've been quite
interested and surprised that NAFTA seems to be a greater source of
conversation among people that I've talked to than the health program.
And, unfortunately, while there seems to be support in many quarters,
the sentiment at the moment is that NAFTA is not going to pass, for
what that's worth.
Turning to the national economy, our forecast in the near
term is very close to that of the Greenbook. We do see greater growth
in the middle to the latter part of 1994 and our inflation forecast is
a little higher. That increased growth in our forecast is predicated
almost entirely on our assumption that hours worked and overtime can't
continue at this level and that at some point employers are going to
have to take on additional workers. While that's in the forecast, I
think employers are still at this point very reluctant to take on
additional people; and where they are adding workers at all, they are
temporary workers for the most part.
If we get the Greenbook
forecast, which is a bit lower than ours in 1994, I think that would
not be a bad result. I think at this point we're in the fortunate
position of perhaps being able to sit back and wait to see what data
come in a little later. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, turning to the District, the level
of economic activity seems very much unchanged since the last meeting.
Still, the underlying tone of the reports seems a bit stronger, at
least in terms of volumes. The automotive business continues at a
surprisingly good pace. The fourth-quarter production schedules have
been set some 11 percent over last year. In a comparative sense, the
fourth quarter of last year was really quite a strong one so this
year's fourth quarter bodes to be a pretty good one. And with retail
inventories still at good levels, as long as the sales hold up the
industry thinks the downside risk on production is reasonably limited.
The automotive industry, therefore, expects that their activity will
be a plus in terms of fourth-quarter GDP. The steel business
continues at a strong pace given the good first half that they had; it
was the best first half since 1981. As [for] the current level of
operations, they're at running about 87 percent of capacity. They

-14-

9/23/93

So,
expect shipments this year to come in at 87 to 88 million tons.
in terms of production it's a good year. They just aren't making any
money. The October price increase that was announced earlier is not
going to stick; but despite that they're really pumping out a lot of
metal.
Despite the floods and other adversities in the agricultural
sector--and as an aside I would say that the weather over the next few
weeks is certainly going to be critical to that sector--the farm
equipment business continues to be very strong. The company I talked
to has a scheduled fourth-quarter production level some 30 percent
over last year, but last year was really a very, very poor comparative
quarter. In the truck business, the 1994 outlook for medium trucks is
good. They're expecting a 10 percent increase next year. Heavy
trucks will be down a bit, 5 to 6 percent, but this is a result of a
regulatory issue; there's a change taking place at the beginning of
next year and, therefore, there was some advance buying this year to
get the trucks in before that change. I continue to be impressed,
really even surprised, by the intensive competitive conditions of the
marketplace and the very restraining effect that is having on pricing.
Many companies are achieving outright reductions in the cost of their
outside purchases. And for those companies experiencing increases,
the increases tend to be pretty small and in the production process
they are able to overcome those through productivity improvements.
So, it really is a very, very intense pricing environment. But I do
find the employment aspects of the environment increasingly worrying.
Companies are continuing to contract their work forces, and CEOs are
taking a very, very hard line on this and are exerting an awful lot of
employment discipline on their organizations. As an example, in one
company in Chicago, which 15 years ago had sales of about $1 billion
and 53,000 employees, their sales level currently is up to $4 billion
and their employment level is down to 25,000. And despite the
increased production levels, which in some cases really are quite
significant, I think it's a fair statement to say that no one I have
talked to plans to add permanent employees to their payroll.
One change in the outlook that I find a little interesting
and almost surprising is in the commercial real estate business. I
talk to a company from time to time that is in the upper end of the
commercial business, and over the last three years they have had
nothing to report other than just absolutely dismal conditions.
This
time, though, there was a slight change in the tone. They think
conditions are beginning to improve. As yields on alternative
investments have come down, people are looking at real estate as a
possible investment for a higher yield. This is probably an
improvement for the wrong reason; nonetheless, it appears to be
beginning to result in something of a stronger tone in rental
conditions, terms, and other things like that. They expect, if this
continues and there is an improvement, that as we get into the second
half of the 1990s the underlying fundamentals can begin to show some
improvement.
With regard to the national economy, I think the 2-1/2
percent or so growth rate that we've been talking about continues to
be very realistic, very achievable, and that at this point the risks
are about evenly balanced. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Parry.

-15-

9/23/93

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic activity in the Twelfth
District is still weak, and it's not a surprise to indicate that that
is due largely to poor conditions in California. We saw employment
down in August; since the peak of employment in July of 1990 there
have been 588,000 jobs lost in the state. It's also interesting to
note that if one were to back the state out of the national figures
we'd probably have an unemployment rate of about 6.3 or 6.4 percent as
Residential construction activity shows
opposed to the 6.7 percent.
no signs of picking up in the state and this, of course, is despite
the low interest rates and also reduced home prices. The number of
housing permits is down 13 percent from a year ago and stands at about
a third of the level that was reached in 1989.
On the commercial
side, the only thing I could say that would be of a positive nature is
that property values have fallen so low that we seem to see some
serious buyers in the markets. Actually, there are some transactions
taking place. If you looked at the situation a year ago there was
virtually no activity. Reflecting California's economic troubles, net
migration to other states rose to 150,000 in fiscal 1993.
In
contrast, the number of legal foreign immigrants to California rose 23
percent in 1992 to a record 237,500. Now, the official estimate is
that illegal immigrants are 100,000; I think that's really low. So,
in spite of the moves to other states, the state's population is
growing very rapidly.
Conditions are much better in other parts of the [District].
In fact, we have two states that are among the top five in the nation
in terms of growth rates, Utah and Nevada. Homebuilding activity is
very strong. The number of housing permits during the three-month
period that ended in July was up 22 percent in Idaho and 35 percent in
Utah. Home prices are rising dramatically. From 1990 they're up 27
percent in Boise, up 18 percent in Salt Lake City, up 16 percent in
Las Vegas, and up 13 percent in Reno. Manufacturing growth is also
strong and outpacing the national average in many of these states.
We've seen 4.3 percent growth in manufacturing in Idaho, 3.4 percent
in Nevada, and 1.7 percent in Utah.
If I can turn for a moment to the national economy:
While I
agree with the Greenbook pattern of modestly accelerating growth and
decelerating inflation, I'd have to say I'm a bit more optimistic
about the magnitudes in 1994. We're expecting that real growth will
be up a bit more--not quite half a percent--with somewhat less
inflation. On the price side, while some factors--certainly one-time
factors--are going to have the effect of tending to raise the CPI a
bit in 1994, our estimates are that we're going to see some greater
improvement in the CPI than is indicated in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Well, there hasn't
been much change in our District over the period since the last
meeting. The information we're receiving from our business contacts,
directors, and others indicates that the District's economy is growing
at a moderate pace. But, as Bob Forrestal said, we've been hit hard
in agriculture by the drought; we're coming out of that now but
outside of agriculture things are pretty much unchanged. As
elsewhere, people are frustrated by the slow pace of overall recovery;
they are especially frustrated by the sluggishness in job growth. But
I don't think very many people in our region think the economy is

9/23/93

-16-

about to turn back down. One sector where we do seem to be seeing
pretty consistent signs of somewhat greater strength is housing. Home
sales, construction, and both new and existing home prices seem to be
rising in most local areas in our region.
As far as the national economy is concerned, the Greenbook's
projection is certainly reasonable and plausible; and objectively
speaking the risk of error is probably pretty evenly balanced on both
the up side and the down side, given what we know now. I've been more
optimistic about the outlook in recent months than most people and I
guess most people have been more optimistic than the actual outcome.
But I think I have been more optimistic than most people coming into
this meeting, so I need to be a little humble in making any conjecture
about future growth at this point. Nevertheless, I would humbly
submit that we may get somewhat stronger growth going forward than the
staff expects.
I would make three points in this regard.
First, both
the Greenbook and the Beigebook seem to suggest that the greater
strength in housing, which as I said a minute ago we see in our
District, is pretty general across the country. As the Greenbook
points out, the latest reports of builders, lenders, home buyers, and
others in the market all seem to indicate that the housing outlook
generally is better than some of the latest data seem to suggest.
That might to some extent be substantiated by the increase in housing
in August that you announced a minute ago, Mike. In light of these
reports, and given the substantial further decline in mortgage rates,
the pickup in housing that seems to be going on currently may turn out
to be more robust and sharper than many people think. Second, I think
consumer spending is looking increasingly solid. We had a good rate
of increase in real personal consumption expenditures in the second
quarter and, given a high level in July--if I calculated this
correctly--the third-quarter rate conceivably could be close to 4
percent even if there are relatively small increases in the months of
August and September. And finally, as many people have pointed out,
job market conditions are generally stronger than the weak August
payroll figure would seem to suggest. The lengthening workweek, the
strength in the household survey data, the continued fairly healthy
rise in help wanted advertising, all suggest to me that the labor
market is at least holding steady and perhaps even improving a bit.
So all in all, it seems to me that at least one can say that
private domestic final demand is firming up noticeably. Well,
"noticeably" is too strong; I guess one has to exert a little effort
to notice it, but I think it's there. Activity undoubtedly will
continue to be restrained going forward by the forthcoming tax
increases, employer concern about the cost implications of health care
reform, and the economic weakness in many of our major export markets.
But I still think on balance that there's a better than even chance
that we will get a little more growth than the 2.3 percent rate
projected by the Greenbook for the second half of the year.
One final point, if I may:
In my view the most significant
development by far since the last meeting is the further decline in
long-term rates. One of our major objectives in policy in recent
years, as you all know, has been to help bring long-term interest
rates down further by raising the credibility of our efforts to
I think the much greater than
achieve price stability over time.
expected declines in long rates recently are evidence that that
strategy is working over time. That may be evidence of other things

-17-

9/23/93

as well, but there's no doubt that our actions recently have aided the
further decline in long rates. And I hope we will do whatever we need
to do going forward to maintain and extend that progress. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District continues
to grow modestly, as I've said time and time again. Construction
remains reasonably good in our area mostly due to housing, primarily
in the western portion of our region in Denver. Energy has posted
gains and that's tied to the natural gas industry, which is still
fairly active in our area. Banks' earnings are doing extremely well;
in the second quarter, as for the nation, they were very strong. In
fact, in Oklahoma, which I think was once the worst in the nation,
banks earned in the second quarter something on the order of 1-1/2
percent on their assets. I was in Oklahoma last week and there were a
couple of banks actually talking about making loans!
That's the first
time they've said that in almost a decade. They said they wanted to
wait two more quarters, though.
[Laughter]
I'm only half kidding!
The service industry is generally solid, although not as good as the
nation. Where tourism is very important, it's a little disappointing.
Manufacturing is really weak; durable goods employment actually has
declined over the last year in our region, about 2-1/2 percent we
estimate, and that has to do in part with the aircraft industry.
Prospectively in our region, we expect more of the same in terms of
slow growth. Low mortgage rates should keep housing starts strong in
our region, especially in the mountain area where there is a bit of
in-migration from California going on. Agriculture will report solid
income, we think, due importantly to livestock prices; and crop losses
will not be sufficient to offset that, including [those associated
with] the effects of the flood and of the drought, and also some
freeze that we had in portions of our region. In manufacturing,
though, we see nothing that would show any strong improvement in our
region, so we think it will continue to be rather slow as we go
forward.
For the nation, we expect moderate growth, as everyone else
does, although we are somewhat stronger than the Greenbook. We also
expect modest inflation, about the same as the Greenbook. Some of
that comes from a little stronger growth in business fixed investment
and a little more accumulation of inventories, but basically we see
very modest growth going forward. Because of our stronger growth
projections, we see employment being a little better than what the
Greenbook shows but, again, not enough to change how we view the
economy into 1994.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. The Philadelphia region has improved a little
but it continues to grow modestly and still, I think, lags the nation.
Employment growth is sluggish and attitudes remain cautious, neither
optimistic nor pessimistic. Where there has been some improvement is
in the manufacturing sector, which has been a major drag on the
economy. It's not that it's going up so much; it's that it has tended
to stabilize after several months of decline. Also, New Jersey, which
has been one of the hardest hit states in the country, appears to be
improving. The weakest sector there was construction, and both
residential and nonresidential are showing some signs of growth

-18-

9/23/93

although from very low levels.
Also, New Jersey had a good tourism
summer and that has been a positive. More generally, I'm picking up
the same kinds of vibrations that Si is in the commercial real estate
That investment in real estate is beginning to look
market:
relatively attractive because other alternatives aren't so good. It
has been a long time since I've heard the term REIT in our board room
but I'm now hearing it again, which isn't all good news. We went
through the REIT problems of 20 years or so ago. But this noise we
hear about some improvement in commercial real estate is not for this
year or next year so much as later in the decade.
District bankers report weak commercial loan demand.
However, when we pursue that a little more, they are beginning to
wonder how they will finance a pickup in loan demand when it comes.
And that's a new kind of attitude. They're worried about the runoff
they've seen in deposits and whether they can get enough deposits back
to fund what they think someday will be an upturn in loan demand.
On the national economy, I think the fundamentals are about
the same and will likely continue to be the same:
moderate growth,
subdued inflationary pressures, employment growth insufficient to
cause a significant drop in unemployment, and cautious attitudes.
I
don't believe there's very much that monetary policy can do to alter
that outlook even if we wanted to. But I think the respite from
criticism that we've had in recent months is likely to come to an end.
Impatience is going to be our greatest foe in the next few months.
And I suspect that we will increasingly have to defend a no change
policy as the restlessness over this rather disappointing employment
growth continues to build.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Even though it has been a fairly short period
since the last meeting of the Committee, I would not characterize the
situation in the District as better than the nation anymore. The mood
coming back after Labor Day for large and small businesses was less
positive for the District than I thought it was before. Objectively,
the numbers look still pretty good. Unemployment has been declining
in our District, even if it hasn't nationally. The auto sector is
doing quite well, mainly because of a larger domestic share, the
transplants and all of that. One of the things that I hadn't
considered before about the transplant companies raises an interesting
problem for them. This came up with the recent Honda actions.
They
cannot effectively sell essentially the same car that's produced in
Ohio and produced in Japan at different prices. So, the exchange rate
is forcing them to make choices between pricing that's appropriate for
an import or pricing that's appropriate for a domestic car, with
considerably different implications for volumes depending on which way
they go.
It's quite different for a company like Honda that has a
very substantial domestic production relative to their total versus
some of the other foreign manufacturers.
Retailing was disappointing. The major retail companies
headquartered in the District that operate nationally said that the
back-to-school selling season was less than they had hoped, but they
remain hopeful about the holiday selling season. In a joint board
meeting last week, large and small businesses made reference to the
idea of expecting leaner times--that '94 would be weaker than '93.

9/23/93

-19-

And they talked about the general pattern of what they call "making
small downward adjustments" in spending habits and expectations in
order for it to get soft in the region. One director in doing a
roundup for me of minority businesses in the major metropolitan areas
said that there's a general sense that minority owned businesses are
being more negatively influenced by government actions than nonminority businesses because of the way the tax laws and the health
care proposals affect them.
Turning to the nation and the Greenbook, a number of comments
are being raised on some issues that concern me. First, this
discussion about long-term rates and the backward-looking model and
the forecast part of that seemed to me like a debate a long, long time
ago, involving the views of Ptolemy and Copernicus. The Ptolemaic
model did work well apparently, but that didn't make it valid. What
we do know is that in the very long run there is a relationship
between the quantity equation and the Fisher equation.
[That's]
because the real return on productive assets and the real return on
financial assets are going to approximate over time the real growth
the economy is able to produce, and one would expect that inflationary
expectations in a sustained steady state world are going to
approximate inflation. In the 1953 to 1963 period nominal GDP growth
averaged about 5 percent, what the Greenbook projects out toward the
end of '94. And, of course, in that period long-term rates were
substantially lower than they are today. But at that time I think we
had a regime where people believed that increased inflation and
interest rates were temporary and bound to go back down, whereas today
we still have the opposite. And what we're trying to do is change
that regime. It's not an inflation objective in terms of numbers, but
rather a mind set about what the natural order of things is.
And that brings me to some [points] about fiscal policy and
the way it was raised both in the projection and discussed in the
Greenbook. Mike said in his response to me that it's not advocacy to
say "achievement of this middling expansion path...."

But that to me

implies that real output is an objective of monetary policy, assuming
we know how to measure the thrust of monetary policy actions on
nominal or real magnitudes.
I'd say a couple of things. This month
is the 25th anniversary of a study completed on various ways of
measuring fiscal policy at the St. Louis Fed; that's a long time ago
and I don't think we've learned a heck of lot since then about how to
gauge these things. The notion of characterizing current fiscal
policy as restraint is about like the Lyndon Johnson surtax of 1968.
I would worry about that being allowed to influence monetary actions
as it did at that time.
If we maintain that the objective of monetary
policy is price stability, somehow measured or viewed, and if we
accept the Greenbook projection that inflation is now higher than we
previously thought it was going to be with the current stance of
policy and if that policy is [deemed] acceptable, then that says that
we have either changed our objective or the time horizon for achieving
that objective or that we think the Greenbook is wrong on its
inflation forecast or our policies are wrong and they need to be
adjusted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Most indicators in the Eleventh Federal Reserve
District remain positive. Our District economy seems to be

-20-

9/23/93

accelerating a bit from a level that was already above the national
average.
NAFTA dominates the conversation in Texas when we talk to
directors, Beigebook respondents, members of the Small Business
Advisory Council, which met last week, and banking groups, although
the small business people are very afraid of mandated health benefits
coming out of the health reform effort. Commercial real estate still
hasn't done much but home and apartment construction are beginning to
be very strong in a lot of our markets, particularly Austin and San
Antonio, and even in Dallas to some extent; within a five mile radius
of where I live there are, I believe, 8,000 to 10,000 apartments under
construction. Austin has more under construction than Los Angeles,
Chicago, or New York, and Dallas is third behind Chicago and Atlanta.
New construction appears to be putting downward pressure on existing
home prices.
I refinanced about three weeks ago. And while I got
some rate relief, my appraisal came in considerably below what I paid
for the house, which is somewhat discouraging because I thought I
moved to Texas at the bottom of the real estate cycle and it turns out
I didn't. We don't hear a lot about upward pressure on prices in the
District but we do hear about it in building materials. Retail sales
in the District seem to be holding up rather well, but
who has interests in real estate, specialty real estate
stores across the nation, and
showed us
a chart
indicating that in the three weeks
following the passage of the new tax law, retail sales in those stores
just collapsed after having been growing rather nicely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is this a high-price type operation?

MR. MCTEER. Not necessarily, it involves things like highvolume office supplies, [unintelligible], that kind of thing. Some of
them are specialty and higher priced. I guess that's all I want to
say.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In New England the
economy is mixed but there are signs of growth. To put this in
context, in a sense one really has to look at this period, given the
enormous overheating we had in the '70s and '80s in New England, as a
long-term healing period. I think that's pretty important, and some
[healing] is still going on. We see some wage rate adjustment [and
other] things happening. And there are improvements in some areas.
We've seen very substantial improvement in the banking sector. Now,
the returns are still not numbers that are comparable to national
figures; return on assets is about 1 percent currently. There is an
improvement in bank willingness to lend, and I think an appropriate
degree of caution with it, but there is more lending now even in small
commercial real estate ventures. On the small business side, I think
there is a willingness to lend, and I think we actually have a new
equilibrium being approached with small business loans being made on
terms that may be [reasonable] over the very long run. Small business
just hasn't adjusted to that, and those who can't just have to get a
deal someplace else and change long-term relationships. But I don't
think there's an awful lot more to be hoped for in that change in
willingness to lend.
Like everyone else, we're seeing an improvement on the
residential side. And even in manufacturing all of this restructuring

9/23/93

that has been going on--we had a lot of transitional problems--is
still going on, but we can see the end of the tunnel, hopefully.
Going back to this issue of price pressures, it's interesting that in
the health care industry, among the producers of health care
equipment--U.S. Surgical and these kinds of [companies]--we really do
see a change in the way people are approaching things. They think
this is a permanent shift in their business in a lot of ways with
very, very substantial price pressures, and they are adjusting prices
downward in some areas. One fellow from a quite large health care
equipment company said:
"If the country does the right thing, my
business is going to be lousy for five years and there's just no way
to avoid that."
We've mentioned that in the mutual fund business we
still see very strong flows [and] increasingly nervous fund managers.
The comfort I take out of this is in their nervousness; it's the nonnervous fund managers who worry me. But I think we are making some
progress there in terms of people being more and more aware of where
we are in this situation. I'd just mention that tourism in New
England runs inversely to air fares.
We had a great year, probably
the best year since the mid-1980s in tourism.
As far as the United States goes, I'm very much in agreement
with the overall contour of the Greenbook forecast. I'm a little more
optimistic on prices but I have to admit that's based on a usual kind
of capacity and to some extent labor market view of things, and I'm a
little more concerned on the export side. I would think that the
risks are probably center-weighted. One thing I can't quite figure
out is these consumption numbers, [given] what we're seeing in the
income numbers.
[The inconsistency] has been going on long enough now
that I'm starting to wonder whether some of the other figures are
right. Particularly in New England, of course, there has been a
revision in some of the data captured in the national revisions. As
bad as things got, the mood never really got as bad as the data were.
And I think that's consistent with what we're seeing now, so it makes
me wonder about them.
Over the long term, I think we just have no choice but to
slide through this period; I have some sympathy for what Ed Boehne
said about what monetary policy can and can't do.
I do think, though,
that we can't avoid, not immediately anyway, the fact that there are
tradeoffs in all of these things. And I personally think that at
least in the intermediate term monetary policy affects real
magnitudes. Over the long term it may be a different matter. And I
always thought the reason we want price stability--and I think it's
absolutely important we get it--is to maximize real output. So I
think that is what we're all about; and unfortunately in some
intermediate periods that can involve some tradeoffs.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. In terms of economic conditions in the District,
the trends and patterns remain generally positive as they have for
quite some time. There are some concerns with regard to agriculture
because of the weather, of course. There's the concern that all the
shoes haven't dropped yet with regard to military bases and possible
closures. And there are some strikes under way in some of the
taconite mines in northern Minnesota and the upper peninsula in
Michigan. But with those caveats, conditions really are pretty good.
Employment is up in all District states and we are getting renewed

-22-

9/23/93

reports of pretty tight labor market conditions in some of the major
That does not seem yet to have translated
markets in the District.
into demonstrable wage pressures, but we are hearing reports of
difficulty in hiring--and these are above-minimum-wage type positions
--and retaining workers.
With regard to the national economy, I don't see much that's
going to break us out of this pattern of moderate growth and moderate
inflation that we've been in for quite some time.
I've been
surprised--Ed Boehne raised this point--that there has been as much
patience, or maybe less impatience than I would have expected, with
regard to the performance of the economy over the past couple of
years. Maybe that's about to change, but so far it seems to me that
there certainly has been less impatience than I expected. And I guess
the Committee at least implicitly seems to be patient or satisfied
with both the pattern of growth and inflation that we've been getting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. In our District the situation is pretty much
like the one Al described. I don't detect any major changes in
activity. We're still seeing modest growth. I would say that retail
sales are reasonably strong. That's not getting fully reflected in
employment, though, where we've been pretty sluggish. We're
relatively stronger than the rest of the country in manufacturing and
quite weak in services right now. Some of that may be flood-related
because of the impact on construction in particular, which has been a
weak sector employment-wise. We do hear reports from our directors
and others about modest expansion in manufacturing areas--firms adding
several hundred jobs here and there.
So, generally, I'd say that's
picking up. Housing has been quite strong over the last year. What
we heard earlier was that the wet weather in the spring was going to
push activity later into the summer and I think we're seeing that now
in terms of a pickup in activity. With respect to the flood and its
effects in general, there wasn't that much disruption of employment
activity and many of those who were disrupted are back to work now.
Cleanup efforts are under way. There will probably be some positive
impact on construction activity in due course, although I don't think
Barge traffic is
it will be that noticeable on a national basis.
moving on the river and so forth, so in many senses the crisis of the
flood is behind us.
In terms of banking, it was interesting to note an increase
in loan activity across the board in the second quarter; actually loan
growth was relatively healthy in Eighth District banks, up not quite 6
Consumer, real estate, and business categories were all
percent.
growing. My final point--maybe this is somewhat related to the flood,
but [it's difficult] nationally to sort out the flood, drought, and
other effects--is that the crop estimates aren't dramatically down
that much. But it's interesting that in Missouri the corn crop is
estimated to be down about 40 percent, which is a fairly dramatic hit,
but in Illinois [the effects are] very little, maybe about 15 percent
in terms of the corn crop.
Nationally, I keep asking myself why I don't feel better
about the relatively sanguine outlook that we have. This ought to be
ideal from a central banker's point of view. I know we're paid to
worry, but real growth around potential and reasonably well behaved

9/23/93

prices is something I guess we ought to feel good about. But there
are two things that bother me somewhat.
One has to do with the fact
that I just don't think we can gauge the current thrust of monetary
policy very well, and I'm very uneasy about the fact that we may well
be in a very stimulative posture and those chickens will come home to
roost. The other thing--and I think it has been appropriate to show
some flexibility on this front--ultimately would be the question in my
mind of moving the inflation rate down closer to what would be some
representation of price stability. Others have commented on this at
other meetings. I think to some extent we've taken comfort in the
fact that prices haven't been moving up. But at some point we may
have to think about trying to move inflation a little lower.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, given what I've done in the last
month, I think my contribution would be to talk about a district we
It's what Congressman Clay called
don't have represented here.
America's internal third world nation. Having been to hearings all
around the country, I thought I'd just report on economic conditions
that I've heard about. There seems to be a growing gap between
expectations, which are rising, and realities, which are falling. The
rising expectations stem largely from political changes and promises
of change and reform. I'd point out that there are extremely high
expectations about what potential changes in the Community
Reinvestment Act could do.
I doubt very much that anything we do
could fulfill those expectations. So I think it's going to lead to
disappointment.
With regard to realities, in the 1980s real black family
income rose about 70 percent faster than real white family income.
Black small business creation as well as Hispanic small business
creation was quite quick. Both of those trends have stopped, which
seems rather puzzling until one thinks about the usual process that's
going on. The usual pattern for all ethnic groups moving up has first
of all been the civil service. And limits on civil service employment
at the state and local level and now in federal civil service are
impacting minority communities particularly. Even more dramatic,
particularly for young people, are cutbacks in military hiring which
has long been a way out. We've seen an historic and continuing trend
of decline in pay in manual jobs; that's no surprise. But during the
'80s there was robust growth in office jobs, which led to rapid gains
in female incomes relative to male incomes. In minority communities
female incomes are a more important component than they are in the
white community, so that was a net plus. That has stopped and it is
one of the problems being faced. And finally on the horizon is the
fact that the health care industry, which has also been a major
employer of blacks and Hispanics, now appears to be facing cuts. As a
result there does not seem to be the job growth going on and,
therefore, the realities are somewhat grimmer.
There is good news. Minority test scores, SATs and what have
you, continue to rise; they've been rising now for 12 years. It's
interesting that white test scores are unchanged, but for all other
groups test scores have been continually rising. The reason they're
static for the country as a whole is that the composition of the
population is changing. But, still, progress is being made.
Graduation rates are up and, according to survey data, drug use is

-24-

9/23/93

down.
In fact, it was lower in the last survey for the minority
community than for the white community. The other big piece of good
news is the [increased] affordability of housing--and that's largely
due to lower interest rates--which is a real plus.
But I'll tell you, I heard quite a bit about the effects of
regulation. Jerry Jordan mentioned that with regard to small business
and minority small business in particular. There are three that I
think we should take a close look at.
The first is the appraisal
mess, which is without any question devastating for the minority
community. Appraisers, even licensed and certified ones, have no idea
how to do appraisals in the inner city and as a result are literally
destroying what equity might exist there. Second is the tightening of
down payment restrictions; the monthly payments are more affordable
but it's a lot harder to come up with 20 percent down than with 10
percent or 5 percent down. And tightening of bank regulation has
adversely affected the minority community in that way. Finally, and I
heard this everywhere I went, is something we don't think about; it's
a classic unintended consequence. For historically underserved
communities, cash is not only a medium of exchange, it's a store of
wealth. If you don't have a bank account you keep your money
literally in cash. Well, in the name of anti money-laundering laws,
we have made the use of that cash and its entry into the banking
system virtually impossible. I had a lady in Denver confront me.
She
was trying to buy a house and had $5,000 in cash; obviously she was
not allowed to use it by the bank, as you might imagine, under our
laws. And she said:
"You're treating everyone in the community as if
they were a drug dealer."
And I had no answer for her. I thought it
was a very good observation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Very interesting.

MR. LINDSEY. It's something we should definitely think
about.
I don't think the Congressmen who are leading the fight on the
Hill are aware of exactly what that's doing. So, I saw a tremendous
amount of bitterness.
I had never seen anything like what I saw at
the hearings in Los Angeles.
I think the country would see a great
cloud lift if we could somehow cut southern California off from the
rest of the country! The bitterness there was not only directed
against the establishment but against other minority groups to an
extent that I just found unbelievable in a public hearing setting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The Koreans and--

MR. LINDSEY. Yes, and backwards in time. We had testimony
from the Chinese banking community, which was a good lesson in
history. As late as 1946, it was illegal for Chinese to own land in
California.
1946!
So, needless to say, this community felt that it
has been historically disadvantaged and yet has solved its own
problems. We had a witness testify who said, in effect:
We solved
our own problems; don't expect us to solve anyone else's problems.
And the witness said it that bluntly. Also, I think the amount of
tension that exists in Los Angeles between the Mexican American
community and the black community is something one never sees on the
news, but it came through loud and clear in the hearings. So, that
was a matter of some concern.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is that going in both directions?

9/23/93

-25-

MR. KELLEY.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. BOEHNE.

You bet.
Yes.
It certainly does in Philadelphia.

It's
It's competition for everything.
MR. LINDSEY. Yes.
competition for civil service jobs; it's competition for contracts;
it's competition for housing.
I don't know what implication it has
for the Greenbook, but it is a matter of great concern that we have a
situation of rising expectations and falling realities. And in the
long run we've got to reverse those two curves.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Right, I would agree with you. I think
the CRA issue has created a political [fallout] that has gotten out of
hand with respect to expectations, and it will be very tough to
fulfill a lot of what people are hoping to see.
MR. BOEHNE. Larry, I think those observations are especially
insightful.
I wonder if you wouldn't mind just dictating some of
those and passing them out.
MR. LINDSEY.

Thank you.

I see the recorder is on.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, maybe it could come from that. Also, some
of that ought to be in your public remarks at the appropriate time.
I
think those are things that need to be said.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think it could be appropriately
embodied in the minutes of this meeting.
MR. SYRON.

Good idea.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The Second District economy remains
extraordinarily flat. The level of employment in the state of New
York is almost exactly what it was 12 months ago. And the level of
employment in our portion of the state of New Jersey is actually down.
So, throughout the area--I've been travelling around upstate New York
and parts of New Jersey--the level of optimism is very low. It's not
quite into pessimism but feelings are sort of flat [and people are]
very concerned about what's going on.
In the national economy, Dick Davis tells me that there has
never been such identity of forecasts between that of the New York
Reserve Bank and the Greenbook, which probably means the chances of
the forecast being wrong are geometrically increased! But we do feel
that [outlook] is by far the best bet. However, probably because of
our proximity to Wall Street I do have stomach rumblings that I think
I should share with the Committee. There is growing concern in the
financial markets about the level of the DOW and of the equity markets
in general--and some concern about the debt markets but considerably
less--as to the sustainability of these levels of equity prices. The
question is the effect that anything other than a very modest
correction could have on the holders of mutual funds who signed the
prospectus that said they understood that what goes up can go down and
that the [value of the] investment could turn out to be less than what

9/23/93

-26-

they invested. But I don't think there are very many who actually
understood what that prospectus said. And there is very serious cause
for concern on our part and growing concern within the financial
community--I suspect in Boston as well, from what Dick Syron said-about what the effect of a sharp correction would be and what the
reaction of the smaller investors will be who by and large were not
there in the '87 crash. Do they think they can get quick cash and
that the cash they will get is at least approximately what they
invested? Some of the more astute mutual fund managers are keeping
higher levels of cash than they normally would, so that they would be
able to handle a greater than usual level of redemption requests. But
it does not appear that those levels of cash are anywhere near high
enough to handle a really sharp correction in the market if there
should be a psychological reaction on the part of the small investor
who says:
"I want to get out."
With the tremendous interconnection of financial markets,
perhaps that concern from our neighbors in Wall Street makes me even
more concerned about certain things that one sees internationally. We
are absolutely in agreement with Ted Truman's forecast on what will
happen in the major economies in Japan, Europe, and Latin America.
And yet I think one has to worry

For our economy I think it's not just the question of what
effect those developments in Europe and Japan could have on net
exports, it's the effect that they could have on the financial markets
as well, which could exacerbate any of these concerns that we might
have about what would happen in the case of a correction in the DOW
and the effect on mutual fund holders.
Domestically, we think,
assuming that there is no contamination from abroad, that the economic
forecast is quite sound. One would think, with the level of consumer
confidence not being very high and the level of business confidence
not being very high, that one would have to be more concerned about

-27-

9/23/93

the forecast being accurate. But it seems to me that the projections
on consumer spending are quite defensible and likely to be accurate.
In the business investment area, we've been doing some
interesting work in New York on where we are in the restructuring of
the corporate sector. And it would appear that it is really a bit
further along than we had thought, pretty close to the point where
most businesses could say that the restructuring in the balance sheet
is about where one would wish it to be. However, it would not appear
that they're very likely to increase production with consumer spending
Is
Then, I think one has to ask the question:
not being more robust.
the forecast of rather strong business investment spending likely to
be right? We think it is because so much of it is in the investment
in increased power of the magic machine; however, that is not geared
toward increased production but rather increased productivity and
would appear even within the bounds of the economic forecast to be
something that one could expect to be very likely to take place.
Another rumbling that we get around Wall Street is that the
attitude toward official Washington has improved considerably over the
last couple of months. It went, if you will recall, from euphoria in
December/January--a kind of view that if Richard Nixon could go to
then-Peking, that a Democratic president could do certain things that
no Republican could do.
Then, [attitudes] went into an enormous funk
in the spring months and are now--I think largely because of the
budget reconciliation bill--somewhat more sensible, I'd say, in the
view that it's going to be very tough to get NAFTA through and it's
going to be very tough to get a sound health bill through. But there
does seem to be a view that Washington is working, if not perfectly,
at least better. So, I don't think that weight on the financial
markets, which I believe was quite serious a few months ago, is quite
what it was then.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Looking back over the last 18 months, the data
seem almost unbelievable. In fact, no one talks about it because it's
really hard to believe. The fact that we got to a 3.9 percent
increase in real GDP--which no one talks about and I would admit
wasn't 4 percent--and then had that cut literally in half...!
In some
ways it doesn't seem that way. That is, during 1992 no one really
felt that good about things and in some ways during 1993 no one feels
that bad about things.
[But] that's really quite a significant step
down to be operating at that level and then to fall back. What makes
it more disconcerting is the fact that in 1992 December over December
the CPI was up 3.1 percent and we've still got the CPI running at 3.1
percent. Now, we're forecasting 1994, Q4 over Q4, of 2-1/2 percent,
and I don't think anyone knows how to change that number. No one
seems to have any real good suggestions or real good alternate numbers
that they've been advocating. To make it even worse, the revisions
seem to show productivity trends higher than we thought they were.
We've got productivity trends very, very high; we've got the ECI very
well behaved and yet we're not getting the kind of combination of
output and price level response that certainly seems desirable. I
wish I could say just why it is that the economy has faltered so
badly, and yet I can only guess. I think corporate rationalization
certainly has been a factor. Certainly, the FASB rules in regard to
post-retirement health care benefits undoubtedly gave some impetus to

-28-

9/23/93

downsizing employment. Certainly, the pension plan underfunding that
seems to be there probably already is impacting large corporate
employment plans. And I think all of us are very well aware of how
disconcerting that is. Apparently, many people who have jobs in this
environment are much more aware of the fact that jobs are not
necessarily permanent. So you'd think maybe we'd be getting a higher
savings response or somewhat more conscious spending response and yet
the numbers don't show that at all. We don't see any budge upward in
the saving rate. So, all in all, from the domestic scene it seems a
very strange combination.
When we look abroad, certainly [we see] the impact of the
economies in Europe and Japan; I guess the Federal Reserve staff and
members of this Committee have all agreed that those economies are
going to be weaker than they were generally thought to be by the
governments and the central banks of those countries. When we look at
the stock market, I guess we would think that if all this downsizing
and rationalization efficiencies are going on, the profit numbers
ought to sustain the kind of equity prices that we see. And yet
ironically we don't seem to be having any inflow from abroad to U.S.
equity markets.
Indeed, in terms of diversification, mutual fund
investors in the United States seem to be the only ones that are
buying equities in Japan. So, all of this gets to be pretty confusing
and maybe I better stop before I get in worse trouble.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. I'm pretty close to where Governor Angell was at
It seems to me that on the economy we have
the end [of his comments].
a rather tight consensus with a couple of important exceptions today.
There was consensus around the Greenbook type of view, and that
certainly includes me. Very frankly that worries me a lot!
I
mistrust it; my contrarian antennae are twitching. I was interested
yesterday in the Wall Street Journal that Keynes reminded us that the
inevitable never happens.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Except for death and taxes!

MR. KELLEY. Good point. I don't mean to be facetious when I
say that the thing that concerns me the most right now is that I don't
know what I should be most concerned about. Where's the balance of
risks?
If you look at the things that we're able to analyze and make
some responsible comments on, the risks seem to be quite balanced.
And it seems to me that the things we can see are unlikely to take us
very far away from our consensus view. It seems to me that if the
consensus were to break, it could most likely be because of some
unanticipated or unexpected event. And it seems to me that the world
may have more than the usual potential for that right now; it always
has potential for it. But there are some things out there that I
think could change things radically. It's easier to see the bad
things than the good ones.
The failure of NAFTA, which could impact
on GATT, could cause a rather severe dislocation of international
trade at least for a while. Many friends of mine in the Southwest are
terrified that oil may collapse below $10 a barrel, which could have
some pretty severe impacts. There are a couple of major economies
that we all know are in a very shaky state. The former Soviet Union
has various civil wars going on; optimism in the Near East runs very
high and it better be brought to pass or [the repercussions] could be

-29-

9/23/93

more severe on the down side than ever, and so forth. I think there
are up side [possibilities] too.
It would not be out of the bounds of
the imagination to see job growth start to pick up; the potential for
that has been alluded to a couple of times this morning.
If that were
to happen, it could have a dramatic impact in terms of a resurgence of
confidence. I think Americans like to be confident, and we haven't
been for a long time. We could see a pretty strong bounceback in
confidence, which could cause a real surge in the economy. All in
all, Mr. Chairman, in August I said that I thought we should all enjoy
our vacations because we'd have work to do soon enough. But it
doesn't seem to me that the time is here yet. And I honestly don't
seem to be able to generate any very clear notion about what it may be
when it comes, either as to timing or circumstances or extent or even
direction. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman,
into what is going on that I had in
Presidents Melzer and McDonough and
I'll just be marked present. Thank
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

all of the Cassandra-like insights
mind have already been stated by
Governors Angell and Kelley. So,
you.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Well, I should follow right along with that.
First of all let me say that I, like a lot of people, have been
I also was disappointed to
disappointed by the [slowdown] in 1993.
see the downward revision by the staff for the third quarter; but I
can't really argue with it. I do hope that the fourth-quarter
If that's the
bounceback that is projected in fact really happens.
case, then that would make 1993 all in all reasonably respectable. I
again am struck by the stark differences in outlook in various regions
and also by Larry's comments about differences among groups.
Sometimes when we focus on the Greenbook or the national economy, we
tend to gloss over some of these drastic differences. One unifying
factor in all of these comments, though, has been continued concern
about the employment situation. The employment gains we've seen so
far in '93 have been encouraging; we have seen jobs added. I think,
though, that job quality is still a problem. Employees are still
trying to learn to adjust to the restructuring via temporary part-time
employment. This notion of downward mobility is still a concern. I
hope that Dick Syron is right and that there is light at the end of
the tunnel.
I wonder whether this is more a function of learning to
live with the adjustment as opposed to light at the end of the tunnel.
All of this, I think, is continuing to weigh on consumer
confidence. That's likely to be exacerbated over the coming months
because of the uncertainties regarding what is happening to health
care reform and taxes and also the NAFTA rhetoric and the defense
cuts. Some of the other risks to the economy have already been
discussed. As for productivity, we've seen a marked improvement so
far in the '90s, but the question remains as to whether that's going
to continue or whether the downturn that we've seen for the first two
quarters of this year is going to be more the shape of the future.
The fiscal drag that is likely to be setting in is a bit more
worrisome because there's less room for error in projections. If
we're at a 1.2 percent projected growth rate for the third quarter,
that doesn't leave as much room for error in potential effects of the

9/23/93

-30-

fiscal drag. And we have yet to see the health insurance and other
spending cuts that are supposed to be put into place play out yet.
State and local government shortfalls also are going to have more of a
negative effect; that's going to mean either more cuts in spending or
more state taxes, neither of which is very healthy for the overall
economy. If the first announcement of the third-quarter GDP is really
around 1 percent, I wonder what kind of effect that's going to have.
It may well be that we're going to start getting more sentiment for a
stimulus package. It may well be--and both Gary Stern and Ed Boehne
talked about this--that the light may be focused on monetary policy a
little more brightly. The other big down side that I'd mention, which
has already been outlined by Bill McDonough and others, is the
uncertainty in Europe, Japan, and the former Soviet Union. I agree
that the risks are not just on the export side but that other kinds of
effects might be engendered if there are problems in those financial
markets.
Now, having said that--and a number of people have stated
that they believe the risks are balanced around the Greenbook
projection--I don't think we should forget some of the strengths that
we do have in the economy. The broader monetary aggregates and even
credit are showing some signs of strength. The banking system is
stronger; the financial markets are stronger. I must admit when I
look at the stock market that I do see it as more problematic than the
bond market, although I'm not one who has visions of tulips when I
look at the stock market. But it is at a higher level.
Perhaps the
last good news or better news story to mention is on the inflation
front:
commodity prices have retreated; the PPI has been showing a
disinflationary trend. And I agree that it's going to be possible to
make some continued progress on core inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Well, Larry Lindsey talked about neighborhoods
and Bill McDonough talked about the world; I guess that leaves
relatively little in between, although there are a lot of things in
common. Bill McDonough suggested that some of the problems have to do
with the
and I have no doubt
that that's the case; but
That's probably not all of it.
I think it
has a lot to do with the nature of this environment in which it's just
a very difficult political job, and no one has been very successful
because of the adjustments we're going through and the economic
sluggishness. And we've had it far better than most countries.
Patience with political systems has already run out, and numerous
incumbent governments have fallen. Just to extend Ed Boehne's
intuition, I would be a little concerned if the patience were to start
to run out with central bankers around the world. Central bankers
have done a pretty good job during this period. We have had a pretty
impressive turnover in leadership in the world's central banks, with a
lot of the seasoned, very credible personalities moving on.
Turning to the domestic side, I see very little new
information to alter the views that I've stated a number of times.
The revisions in the GDP data reinforce my view that the forces of
moderate expansion seem well entrenched. One can certainly see this
for the last six quarters--the last year and a half--which have

9/23/93

-31-

averaged 3 percent real growth. The last four quarters have averaged
3 percent. It is true that 1993 is weaker; we'll wait nine months to
see what it really is, just as we had to do with 1992 as Governor
Angell pointed out. I think the patternthis year is in part due to
the unsustainably robust fourth-quarter 1992 growth of 5.7 percent.
It was natural to have a pullback in the first quarter.
If you take
those two quarters together, there was still 3.3 or 3.4 percent
growth; they are still on this moderate path. But [the swing] created
an inventory adjustment problem, which affected the second quarter and
meant that was only about 2 percent; but still PCE in the second
quarter and final sales grew more than 3 percent. The forces seem to
be there.
And I see no shocks to knock us off this--even the fiscal
package--given the offset on interest rates and given the rather
modest structural reduction in deficits. The third-quarter Greenbook
projection is again for meager growth, 1.2 percent.
I think that is
about what it was last year at this time--maybe precisely what it was
--for the third quarter of 1992.
In fact, in the September 1992
Greenbook the projections for both the third and fourth quarters were
between 1 and 2 percent as we headed into a 4-1/2 percent half. I'm
not suggesting that's going to happen. I would suggest that even in
the Greenbook's forecast the underlying forces of expansion seem to me
to be well in place. Consumption is projected to grow more than 3
percent; business fixed investment is continuing to grow at a reduced
but still healthy pace. Housing growth is expected to pick up and I
think accelerate in the future. Even with slow exports and government
spending, final sales are projected to continue to grow at roughly a 3
percent pace. The low growth in the third quarter projected in the
inventory adjustments, crop
Greenbook is due solely to adjustments:
losses, and the auto inventory adjustment. So, it's an odd picture.
We could have the first three quarters of 1993 come in at 1.3 percent.
Yet, when I look at it underneath--the bottom line numbers--the
underlying growth in demand seems consistent with moderate growth in
the future roughly of the same order of magnitude that we've had in
the past.
It seems to me that sentiment as measured by the Michigan
survey has plateaued at a level well above that prevailing in October
of last year. In October we were just headed into a 5.7 percent
quarter, you'll recall. And the current conditions are also above
that entire fourth quarter of last year.
It is a little troubling
that the longer-term outlook continues to sour in the Michigan survey.
August payroll [employment] was weak; the overall employment data
still seem to reflect steady though gradual improvement.
Initial
claims continue to ease; the strong hours suggest pent-up labor
demand.
I continue to hear that payroll jobs are weak; they've grown
by 1.7 million in the last 12 months and 1.2 million in the last 8
months. And the household survey, once you make the adjustment, seems
to give the same sort of picture even though it uses an entirely
different methodology.
So, I think this is all consistent with steady momentum.
Diminishing deleveraging head winds have been replaced in part by
fiscal drag but countered by substantial easing in the capital market
environment, and the dollar has eased some as well. It's interesting
that the long bond yield has come down 50 basis points in the last
month. Real long-term rates when you use the Michigan long-term

9/23/93

-32-

inflation expectations or the Philadelphia one are starting to get to
quite low levels. On inflation, I think Governor Phillips is right;
the PPI has performed remarkably well; it's up only .7 percent over
the entire 12 months. Of course, ex tobacco it's up 2 percent! So,
smokers are approaching price stability!
[Laughter]
I think the
health care plan may well take care of that. It is down a bit ex
tobacco and maybe that's not quite fair. But I think it is clear that
The highereven with that adjustment we have made some progress.
than-expected CPI we had recently for August did remind us that the
bond markets still notice these things; they backed up a bit. Core
CPI for the year to date is up at a rate of 3.3 percent, the same as
for the 12-month period and the same as it was at the end of last
year. It's an interesting 12-month period, though, because it
consists of the most recent 6 months with core CPI at 2.5 percent and
the previous 6 months at 4 percent.
I think this pattern of a run-up
in inflation that we saw is easier to understand with the revised GDP
numbers when we realize just how explosive growth was in the latter
part of 1992 and why people might have tried to return to passing
through 4 percent price increases. And once it was clear that growth
was going to moderate, the increases didn't stick. It's not at all
clear to me where we go on inflation now. Commodity prices are again
subdued only if we include oil prices. They still show a bit of an
upward pattern without oil prices. Now, the Administration has
inflation flattening and turning up gradually despite ample projected
slack. It stabilizes once the slack has disappeared, but while
there's plenty of slack in the economy inflation continues up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They need that for revenues!

MR. MULLINS. Well, it's interesting that they appear to
suggest that our current interest rate environment is unsustainable
because they do show interest rates increasing to levels above the
inflation rate pretty quickly next year. Next year they show a
Treasury bill rate above the inflation rate and then moving on up.
Again, with the slack, I don't see why we shouldn't expect the
disinflation trend to be re-established. I think that should be our
objective and I hope we will get there. Of course, rates are still
quite low now, both short and long rates. I think the financial
system has eased and that monetary policy is doing what it can do to
support growth. We're still pumping out the liquidity. M1 growth is
12 percent and is projected at 11 percent for the year. M2 plus bond
and stock funds has accelerated to 6 percent growth in the second
quarter and 7 percent in the third quarter. Governor Phillips
mentioned that nonfinancial, non-government debt has gradually
increased; it's growing at a rather moderate level.
So, I think we're
still sort of pushing it.
I see no convincing evidence that we've
gone too far. By the time we see such evidence, we'll probably be a
bit late. So, I feel there's very little new to add. The economy
still seems to be on track and I think we still will likely face some
challenges on monetary policy, and we should try to stay focused and
conscious during this period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
doughnuts?
MR. BERNARD.

Yes.

Do we have some coffee and some

9/23/93

-33-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
with Don Kohn.

We'll adjourn for coffee and come back
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Mr. Kohn.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Questions for Mr. Kohn?

MR. JORDAN. Don, on the chart package--I guess everybody got
this yesterday--the last two pages have M1 velocity and opportunity
costs and M2 velocity and opportunity costs. The Committee has had
some discussions in the past about what is going on with the relation
between M2 and alternative variables.
I don't recall any discussion
about M1, its velocity, and opportunity costs. Looking at this, it
struck me first how close the relationship still appears to be
visually. And I started thinking about some other things that I once
was more familiar with than I am today, the empirical models of money
demand on the monetary base and M1 that use intermediate- and longerterm interest rates. Over the last year we've had double-digit growth
of M1 and the base, on the order of 10 to 12 percent, about twice the
rate of growth of nominal GDP. And the decline that we tended to get
in long rates is consistent with the elasticities in those earlier
studies.
I don't know what you have in your opportunity costs, but
using either version of that, I can think of four possibilities for
the future. It would be interesting to get you to assign
probabilities to the possible outcomes. One, of course, is that the
relationship simply breaks down. One would be that nominal GDP
accelerates to double-digit rates. At least the Greenbook doesn't
have that! That would at least establish the relationship of
velocity. A third would be that M1 and monetary base growth are
essentially cut in half in the next year, down to about 5 percent or
so, consistent with nominal GDP growth. And the fourth is that we
continue to get a plunge in opportunity costs.
Since I don't know
what yours are, I don't know what those implications are; but for
long-term government bonds that means a yield of approximately 4-1/2
percent a year from now. Comments?
MR. KOHN. It's true that our models also have been tracking
M1 pretty well, as you can see from this chart. We use short-term
interest rates--the [3]-month Treasury bill rate--relative to rates on
NOW accounts basically as the opportunity cost for [the NOW account
component of] M1, and the short-term interest rate itself relative to
the zero on the currency and demand deposits [components].
We find
that our models underpredicted M1 a little over the last few years and
we think that's primarily because of the currency flows overseas and
maybe a little because of the mortgage repayments which are mostly in
demand deposits. So, I guess we don't see a major disconnect that
needs to be changed here. We have slightly slower M1 growth projected
for next year based on our expectations that in fact interest rates
will be flat and that there will be some further decline in NOW
account rates. It continues to be [unintelligible] at the end of this
year and the beginning of next year by mortgage refinancing. So, I'm
not sure we see anything major that needs to be explained. M1 has
always been very interest-sensitive, and I think that was the reason
the Committee stopped targeting it in the early '80s.
It's just that

9/23/93

-34-

in order to make any sense of the connection between M1 and nominal
income one had to be very clear about the connection between interest
rates and nominal income. When NOW accounts were invented, the swing
between [small] time deposits and NOW accounts as interest rates moved
became very dominant in the M1 demand [function], and it became
extremely interest-sensitive. So the initial response of the
Committee was a widening of the bands for M1, then they re-based it
midway through the year, and finally they just threw up their hands.
If you couldn't get a fix on interest rates, you couldn't really get a
fix on the M1/GNP relationship. I agree with your original
observation:
that, unlike for M2, we don't see major unexplained
misses in M1 relative to interest rates and income. It's just that
the relationship [between M1 and nominal GDP] is not very tight. The
velocity of M1 swings over very, very wide ranges. So, therefore, it
hasn't been all that useful to the Committee in guiding policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don?
If not, let
me get started. But first let me raise an issue which has been
disturbing me more than the economy in recent weeks, and that is the
initiatives up on the Hill with respect to the structure of the
Federal Reserve System. As Don Winn will be discussing, there are
hearings forthcoming in the next few weeks on the Gonzalez bill, and
Senator Sarbanes will be there as well.
Secondarily there is the
issue of the consolidation of regulatory agencies under a central
independent agency. When I looked at both of those initiatives, I
concluded that they didn't necessarily have very much behind them.
That probably is still a correct presumption, but I'm no longer sure
that that is the case. We here at the Board, I hope in conjunction
with those of you at Reserve Banks, will be increasingly sensitive to
the fact that this issue is surfacing and we're going to have to
respond to it. We are going to have to appear as a sort of partial
Committee at the request of Mr. Gonzalez. I'm going to have to go up
there.
[Given] the people who are being asked to testify before the
House Banking Committee, it clearly suggests that we are leaning up
against a stacked deck. It really is a wholly unbalanced operation.
But instead of shrugging it off, I'm inclined to increase quite
significantly our general positioning to make certain that we don't
allow something to sneak up from behind and result in some major
changes in this institution purely because we were too complacent.
In
any event, Don Winn will be discussing with us the current initiatives
at lunch.
MR. KEEHN. When you say "a stacked deck," do you mean in
terms of the people who will be testifying in front of them or is
there something else?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The witnesses are all there to say that
the Gonzalez and the Sarbanes bills are perfect.
MR. KEEHN.
MR. MULLINS.

The non-Fed witnesses?
We hope so!

[Laughter]

MR. KEEHN. Who other than the voting members
is likely to appear there?

[of the FOMC]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, ask that of Don Winn; it's not
clear what is going to happen. In that regard let me just say that we

9/23/93

-35-

have been successful in keeping the issue of the minutes reasonably
under cover.
I think we have to be especially circumspect in the next
couple of months and keep our heads down as best we can.

Let me
just tell you that the last thing we need during this sensitive period
is any indication that there is a loose cannon in this organization.
Maybe I'm being overly sensitive about what the risk to our
institution is, but I much prefer to be overly sensitive and too
cautious and find out after the fact that it was all unnecessary than
to be on the other side of that issue. I just want to emphasize that
this seems to be bulging in a way that makes me a little more nervous
than I'd like to be. We'll review that summons a little more with
respect to the legislative initiative at lunch, but I didn't want to
discuss a number of things at lunch other than just what the
legislative agenda is.
So, I just want to put that on the table.
I think the policy questions are less difficult, less a
matter of concern. The more I look at the data the more I'm inclined
to believe, as some of you have hinted, that there is something wrong
with the numbers we are looking at.
It's just not credible to me that
we can have a significant rise in employment and in hours both from
the payroll series and the household series--two measures that are
about as independent as one can get of an economic phenomenon--and say
that the GDP indicates productivity declined in the first half of this
year. Now, I don't know what is going on in the statistical system,
but I'm almost certain that out in the real world in an economy that
is growing, the thought that we are having declining productivity just
doesn't square with my understanding of the real world.
Historically we have had alternate measures of output--for
example, gross domestic income. Granted, the income side of the
national income accounts is a little more flaky measure--with the
proprietor incomes categories and even some of the profitability
numbers--than the output side, which is the reason obviously that the
output side is used. But if you look at it, you get something that
frankly looks a lot more credible. You get a much lower rate of
increase in gross real incomes in the second half of last year, or
more exactly in the growth of gross domestic income in constant
dollars; that grew a lot more slowly than the GDP and it was
moderately faster in the first half of this year. I haven't looked to
see what happened to the productivity numbers but my suspicion is they
were still going down a little. I'm inclined to believe that when we
look back at this period with the better annualized data, which may be
a year or two years from now, it's going to look better because we
can't have the unemployment rate declining, the initial claims falling
and, as Governor Mullins said, a tight labor market with average hours
of work moving up, and have declining productivity. It just doesn't
make sense. Something is wrong with the data system, and I suspect-or I hope--that eventually that will get resolved. If you look at the

9/23/93

-36-

industrial production index and its counterparts in other elements of
GDP, it does look as though it was extraordinary even before the
revisions; but with the revision we're still getting some evidence
that the real part--the goods part--of the GDP may be running somewhat
under what we're picking up in the industrial production index. It's
a close issue and, frankly, I haven't had a chance to have somebody
look at it in the detail that I would look at it.
But the numbers
just don't square.
If that is in fact the case, we may be not all
that far from potential here. I'd say the economy is moving [up at a
rate] that has to be over 2 percent at this point, maybe 2-1/2
percent. I realize that this may seem to be making the figure look
the way I think policy ought to run, but since I don't sense that
anybody out there is talking in terms of any radical changes, I won't
press this issue.
The one thing I heard around this table, which I did find
rather encouraging, was some semblance of a pickup in transactions in
commercial real estate--not in prices. But the first stage of a
bottoming out of the commercial real estate operation has to be that
the number of transactions has picked up, because we [previously] had
a terrific decline in the bids for the properties. The offering rates
came down somewhat, but there was no meeting [of supply and demand]
and nobody was doing anything. And it's only when the offering rates
come down to the bid prices that the thing changes. And it's about
time because if you look back at when the whole thing began to change,
we have experienced a very significant number of periods where leases
have been renewed. In other words, we've actually had most of the
leasing adjustment and the [market clearing] valuations are beginning
to emerge and apparently the ice is cracking. If we have been dealing
with a significant balance sheet stringency problem in both the
household and especially in the business area where commercial
property collateral has been a critical factor in the whole system of
restraint and if this [restraint] is beginning to ease, it may be that
we're seeing the first stage [of a turnaround] in commercial banking
itself; it may be starting to nudge back. And this little modest
quickening of M2 may be something; then again it may not be. But I
don't think the outlook has deteriorated at all; I don't think it has
been great on the other side.
I suspect that eventually we'll come
out of this, but I don't think it's going to be soon. We still have a
way to go.
[It's clear] looking at the various relationships in the
balance sheets that those relationships are not anywhere near back to
where they were in 1987. And it should be fairly obvious, having gone
through what we've gone through, that if anything the desired
equity/debt ratios have probably gone up, not down, since 1987.
So,
we probably are still working our way through that; but as we've
discussed many times in the past, the economy can accelerate its
growth before the so-called head winds go to zero.
As far as I can see, leaving aside the quality of the
figures, the process that we're going through seems to me exactly what
we perceived it to be over the last year. As I recall, we got to a 3
percent funds rate a year ago. I like to interpret that as:
We
finally got it right and decided to sit with it. In retrospect it may
not be the wrong interpretation that we happened to hit the right
level of policy. Despite the issues that Jerry Jordan is raising
about a lot of things going on underneath, which is unquestionably
true, we probably have not been badly fixed for the last year. And
unless the data that come out a year or two years from now suggest

9/23/93

that the economy actually is growing far faster than we think and we
should have been tightening, my expectation is that we'll look back at
this period and say that for once we got it right for a longer period
of time than has ever been the case in the history of this
institution. In any event, listening to what I have heard around the
table I don't see any inclination, at least on the part of anyone who
has spoken up, to move off where we are, which at the moment is a
symmetric and no change directive. And I personally don't see any
particular reason why we should veer from that prior to the next
meeting, which is in mid-November.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, when we used to be asked
"Are interest rates going up or down?" we always dodged the question
by saying "Yes." We can't say that anymore; we have to say "Maybe."
[Laughter]
But I think your analysis is quite right.
MR. KEEHN.

"B" symmetric, I completely agree.

MR. SYRON.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FORRESTAL.

President Forrestal.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. "B" symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Governor LaWare.

"B" symmetric.

MR. BROADDUS.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOENIG.

President Hoenig.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.
MR. BOEHNE.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

President Stern.

Far be it for me to break the pattern:

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

Governor Phillips.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.
symmetric.

"B" symmetric.

Governor Mullins.

I agree, "B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry,

"B"

-38-

9/23/93

MR. PARRY.

Agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.

President Melzer.

Count me in!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I can go along with "B" symmetric.
I would
simply note that if you're looking at real output, the recognition lag
may be longer than we would wish it to be. So I agree with you that
we need to remain alert.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

President McTeer.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody else?
out for an official vote. Would you read--

If not, we'll put that

MR. BERNARD. This language is on page 13 of the Bluebook:
"In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the
Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for
price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly lesser reserve
restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period. The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
modest growth in M2 and M3 over the balance of the year."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Call the roll].

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
on November 16, 1993.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

We will adjourn, and our next meeting is
END OF MEETING

