FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
CONFERENCE CALL
November 9, 1993
PRESENT:

Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Boehne
Mr. Keehn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Lindsey
Mr. McTeer
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Stern
Messrs. Broaddus, Forrestal, Oltman, and Parry, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, and Syron, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of
Kansas City, St. Louis, and Boston respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Messrs. Lindsey and Siegman, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager for Foreign Operations, System Open Market Account
Ms. Lovett, Manager for Domestic Operations, System Open Market Account
Mr. Checki, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Beebe, J. Davis, and Dewald, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Bank of San Francisco, Cleveland, and St. Louis respectively
Mr. Kos, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
November 9, 1993
MR. BERNARD. Because the matters to be discussed at this
conference call are of a sensitive international nature, staff
attendance here at the Board is being severely limited, and the
Chairman urges that the Reserve Banks also limit staff attendance to
those who absolutely need to be in attendance.
Secondly, I would like to mention that this conference call
is being electronically recorded.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the event that you wish to reshuffle
who is on this call, I will just wait for a minute or two.

York.

MR. BERNARD. President McDonough has not arrived yet in New
He is on his way from the airport. Mr. Oltman is present.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I suspect most of you assume,
considerable difficulty is beginning to emerge in Mexico with respect
to the pending vote coming up on NAFTA. Originally, as of four or
five days ago, they had approximately $23 billion in reserves; through
yesterday they were down $4.7 billion. Charles Siegman, do you know
of any intervention?
MR. SIEGMAN.

No intervention today.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

There has been none or you do not know

of any?
MR. SIEGMAN.

There has been none today as of an hour ago.

[Secretary's note:
This telephone conference was called on
short notice and took place late in the afternoon.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As you can probably observe on Reuters
or elsewhere, there has been a significant shift in the normal range
of the peso, which is basically at the lower limit of the crawling
[exchange rate band].
As a consequence of that, you can imagine that
there is very considerable nervousness, and [Mexican authorities] have
been in consultation with the Treasury Department here. What I
thought I would do is to turn [the floor] over to Charlie Siegman, and
he will bring you up-to-date on the details of what has been happening
in recent days. He will also discuss alternate suggestions that we
and the Treasury are in the process of considering [pursuant to]
certain requests that [Mexican officials] have raised with us.
Charles.
MR. SIEGMAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For quite a while the
Mexican authorities have succeeded in keeping a stable exchange rate
without necessarily much support on a permanent basis. However, last
week the pressures mounted and the authorities allowed the rate to
depreciate slightly, but it required a very sizable amount of
intervention as was just pointed out. Nevertheless, they held [the
exchange rate] in the vicinity of 3.15 pesos per dollar. When they
abandoned the internal band on the level of the peso, the rate has
moved today to 3.24 and it is steady at this stage. So they have more
room for depreciation within their now enlarged band.

11/9/93

The pressure on the financial markets also has spread over
the past week to the stock market. Whereas previously the stock
market had a very sizable run-up, part of that run-up has been erased
by sizable losses--losses of 1 to 2 percent--in recent days. Today,
however, the stock market is up slightly. But [Mexican officials] are
not very hopeful that they can withstand the mounting pressures partly
associated with the uncertainties regarding the NAFTA debate. They
are fearful that additional pressures will mount unless there is some
sense in the market that they have both the resources and the public
support. They approached the Treasury for a financial support
package, a multilateral one, but emphasized that they would not
necessarily want to draw on that facility.
What they are looking for is a
multilateral support facility, which the Treasury is considering, in
the range of
from the G-10 countries--including the
United States--and Spain. The Treasury is considering in thinking
about this that the U.S. participation would be in the $5 to $6
billion range.
With regard to Federal Reserve participation, there are two
aspects. One, which is for the moment the item of immediate [concern]
at least, is to consider allowing the Mexican authorities to draw on
the $700 million swap line that is currently in existence. In order
for the Federal Reserve to take a part of the proposed U.S. share of
this larger facility, we would obviously have to enlarge the swap
line, which is a separate issue; but that might come up as
developments proceed.
MR. ANGELL.

The swap line between the Treasury and the Fed?

MR. SIEGMAN. The Treasury has a swap line of $300 million,
which they are prepared to enlarge.
MR. ANGELL. Okay, but you are not talking about enlarging
the swap line between the Fed and the Treasury?
MR. SIEGMAN.
of Mexico.
MR. ANGELL.

No, no.

This is between the Fed and the Bank

Yes.

MR. SIEGMAN. For the moment it is a $700 million swap line,
and that is what we have to talk about. The purpose of raising this
issue with you is to bring you up-to-date and to alert you that there
is a possibility that either an activation of the existing swap line
or potentially an enlargement of the swap line might be forthcoming.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me interpose that in both instances
there is still the question of whether it would be
So far the requests from the Bank of
Mexico have been only for window-dressing because basically they have
approximately $18 billion in reserves and do not obviously need [the
additional funds].
They are essentially looking for support not of a
financial nature but of a policy nature coming from the BIS and very
specifically from us. The Treasury is prepared, if asked, to answer a
question about today's apparent devaluation, which they are now no

11/9/93

longer calling a devaluation.
put together?

Charles, why don't you read what they

"What is your reaction to the
MR. SIEGMAN. The question:
depreciation of the Mexican peso today?"
Proposed answer:
"The
United States believes that Mexico is pursuing sound economic
policies. It is apparent, however, that financial markets are
responding to the uncertainties regarding NAFTA. The Mexican
authorities have responded within the framework of their current
approach to foreign exchange markets by introducing temporarily
greater flexibility in the peso exchange rate. We believe that this
is an appropriate step in current circumstances."
The Mexicans also raised interest rates today, to 23 percent
on their overnight rate. And the auction that is scheduled for
tomorrow is likely to show an increase as well in long maturities
because in the new offerings the rates already have increased by 2 to
The overnight rate increased from 15 percent
3 percentage points.
yesterday to 23 percent today. So, they are taking additional support
actions internally. They have approached the IMF for a support
statement and Michel Camdessus is prepared to offer a statement to the
effect that they are pursuing sound policies and that they are doing
well as far as the policy environment is concerned. They are not
considering drawing in a standby arrangement, but they are considering
having a first tranche drawing, which would give them approximately
$600 million of additional liquid funds.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Unlike previous episodes, this is the
type of case for which the swap lines were originally constructed in
the sense that their implementation [was envisaged for times such as
this when] we believe, as indeed I think we probably do, that
financial and economic policies in Mexico have been remarkably sound
considering where they were coming from and what they are doing. So
if this is going to be an aberration which is not a direct result of
their particular policies and we think it's a temporary affair, then
it is an obvious [case for] central bank action. The one caveat I
would put to that question is that the extent to which the real
exchange rate has been rising is unclear. We have discussed that with
them on numerous occasions.
If one takes the exchange rate and uses
the consumer price index, [the rise] is obvious. Their argument is
that the export sensitive industry prices are not moving in that
direction.
I have no way, frankly, of verifying whether that
statement is true or false. But it is clearly something which the
Finance Ministry and the Bank of Mexico have believed. So one can
possibly argue that this [market disturbance] might have popped in any
event at some point, but it is not clear. What is clear is that their
fundamental policies, even in the sense of constructing this crawling
peg, have been very sensible. Indeed, at least as far as I can see,
they have done the best job of the LDCs that we have seen in quite a
while.
MR. SYRON. It seems that there is one other issue here that
is related in a broader sense, which is that their current problem is
one that we got them into.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One can say it was President Salinas who
initiated NAFTA and not us, but there is certainly a joint problem of
responsibility.

11/9/93

MR. ANGELL.
It would be helpful in regard to our reaction to
this information if you would tell us what the vote on NAFTA is going
to be.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have it right here, Governor Angell,
but I can't seem to find it! This is, needless to say, not the most
appropriate time for this event to occur.
MR. LINDSEY. The real question you are asking, though, is
whether after the vote on NAFTA we expect the Mexican peso to return
to a normal value or not. It is not a yes or no vote on Mexican
policy in the past, which we all agree has been excellent.
It is
whether or not this new random event, which is going to take place
down the road, will change the fundamental value of the peso.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

You mean from the 3.15 that--

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. My own impression is that if they allow
it to go back to 3.15, they are crazy--that this is an ideal
opportunity, basically, to enable an adjustment process to take place.

MR. LINDSEY.

It is 3.15 but they have allowed it to go to

MR. SIEGMAN.

About 3.24.

3.24?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If, however, they are right in that the
true price deflator to adjust the exchange rate is being
misrepresented by these general price indexes [unintelligible], then
there is a perfectly sensible argument [that the rate will] come back.
But they have to make that argument, as far as I am concerned, or else
I think it would be foolish to go back to 3.15.
It is an opportunity
to make the type of adjustment which they probably need. The
difficulty with that is that they are dealing with potential
inflationary pressures and with lots of other problems.
I frankly
would not second guess them.
MR. LINDSEY. Wouldn't provision of the swap line simply work
to encourage them to stay at 3.15?
MR. SIEGMAN.

They have moved from 3.15 already.

MR. LINDSEY.

They have?

MR. SIEGMAN. They allowed it to go to 3.24 but they have
more room to go. They shifted the entire band.
MS. PHILLIPS.
MR. SIEGMAN.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. SIEGMAN.

How wide is the band?
The upper limit is close to 3.30.
The upper limit for the dollar against the peso?
Peso, right.

11/9/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SIEGMAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Actually it got to 3.30, didn't it?

It got there and bounced back.
So the high is 3.30 for the dollar.

What is the

low?
MR. SIEGMAN. For them the upper limit is 3.05, but that is
for the moment irrelevant because they are reaching the [lower limit].
MR. ANGELL.
MR. SIEGMAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Right.

Did they take both sides of the band?

No, they only widened the [internal] band.
They just widened the band.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. They widened the band. And what has
been quite remarkable--and I think it has been a big plus for us--is
how successful they have been in holding the rate in the context of
where it has been so far from their lower limit for so long.
MR. ANGELL. It may be that they've been successful because
of the anticipation of NAFTA--that there has been a capital inflow,
which has been driving the rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me tell you what we do know.
Obviously, if their reserve balances have been going up, as they have
very sharply, [in a period when] they have been intervening against
the dollar, it means that the capital flow has been very substantial.
MR. ANGELL.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
not, I am not sure we know.

Now, whether that is a NAFTA effect or

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, this is Bill
It seems to me that one could argue that
McDonough; I just came in.
3.15, say, was an equilibrium rate before this nervousness [arose].
As you put it, they've sustained the rate; they've actually increased
their reserves in the process, so they certainly weren't propping it
up artificially. If NAFTA is voted down, one might argue that
economic theory would lead us to believe that the equilibrium rate
would be a weaker peso. But at the present time, especially since
they have been smart enough to allow the rate to move to the 3.25
area, I think they have handled it rather well and that it would be
very difficult to argue that they are maintaining an artificial
exchange rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that. I think what they
did was this:
They waited for a few days to see whether it would
settle down, decided there was a limit to how much they would allow
reserves to run down, and they made a decision.
MR. LINDSEY. But if they are not running an artificial
exchange rate, why increase the swap line?

-6-

11/9/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What they are concerned about is that
there is a very large potential irrational body of opinion which could
temporarily run against the peso.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, then let those people who are irrational
lose money in the market.
If people want to move the peso to 3.50,
and we all think it should be 3.20 or 3.30, let them-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Because that has effects internally in
Mexico which are very difficult to reverse.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I agree with that.
I think it
would be unfortunate for us not to support them and to let the rate go
--even though it would be in response to market forces, but
essentially irrational ones--and then wind up on the 17th with NAFTA
[passed] and some damage done that would be very hard to reverse.
MR. ANGELL. It also runs the risk that it might affect the
vote on NAFTA. That is, a significant depreciation of the peso
running into [the time of the vote on] NAFTA might be exactly the
argument that some would use to say that the United States will be the
loser because of the shift in trade.
It seems to me that it would be
very, very unacceptable to have the shift to a free market-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

To a devaluated peso.

MR. ANGELL. Right, toward a devaluated peso, because it
could affect the vote outcome.
MR. KELLEY.

[Unintelligible]

on the wrong side of the scale.

MR. SYRON. I think Governor Angell has a very good point
there in a broader sense. Like a lot of people I am very skeptical, I
must say, of intervention in many cases. But it seems to me that if
one were to look for a case that falls out of the traditional norm, if
there is any such term, this would be the one. It is one where in
some sense the United States is in the process of entering into this
It is an
treaty and a lot of confusion has been created about it.
extraordinarily political issue. There are a lot of things going on
here that are not fundamental economics. I think as a nation we bear
some responsibility for all of this and I don't think it's quite the
same as supporting ordinary intervention in markets.
MR. SIEGMAN. To repeat, the issue under discussion is not
really to use the Federal Reserve-MR. SYRON. I know that.
Look, we're giving them the money
so they will be able to say they can use it or else we wouldn't be
giving the money.
MR. SIEGMAN. They are considering using their own reserves
of their own
for a while. There's talk that another
reserves may be needed. But they would like to have that moral
support for the moment and
So the
intervention is their own intervention.
MR. ANGELL.
where?

So our specific swap line goes from where to

11/9/93

MR. SIEGMAN.
MR. ANGELL.

To a special New York Fed account.
But what is the amount?

MR. SIEGMAN. For the moment the size of the swap is $700
million. If we participate with Treasury in the order of magnitude
they are talking about, then we might temporarily enlarge the swap
line by an additional $1.8 billion.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. SIEGMAN.

So that would take it up to $2.5 billion.
$2.5 billion.

MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn. Is it clear that the addition
would be shared equally between the Treasury and the Fed?
MR. SIEGMAN. That is what the Treasury is proposing, yes.
They are asking us to-MR. SYRON. Charlie, what do you think would happen with the
other G-10 countries in the multilateral program, assuming we go ahead
and do this? Do you have any notion?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. There was certainly no discussion
of it at all at the BIS meeting, which I literally just walked in the
door from. There was a presentation yesterday to the governors by the
four Latin Americans--the number two man from Mexico, the Argentine,
the Columbian, and the Chilean.
[Unintelligible] impressed by that.
These were four people who were saying such incredibly sensible things
and seeking to follow such excellent policies that this seems to me to
give us an opportunity, when a situation has been created partially
because of the peculiarities of our own political system, to support
one of the best behaving nations at a time when it would be very
useful to them. Certainly it would send a very positive signal that
these virtues that we have been preaching about over the last many
years are something we still believe in. I'm not suggesting that it
should create a precedent for other countries that have a problem.
But NAFTA is something peculiar to Mexico at this stage.
MR. MCTEER.

This is Bob McTeer.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Bob.

MR. MCTEER. I agree with what Bill just said. I have a
question, though. Are we talking about just trying to get something
out of the announcement effect right now? And if so, who would do the
announcing? Would it be the Treasury or the Federal Reserve?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It would probably be a joint
announcement. But that is still premature because the issues have not
crystallized as yet.
It is at this point solely an announcement
effect,
MR. MCTEER. I would hope that Secretary Bentsen will be
personally involved in that announcement.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
we move in this direction,

He will, indeed.

Let me say this.

If

11/9/93

As for how this whole thing
would be stated, I am not yet clear. But prior to going into
negotiations with the Treasury on any of this, before it goes very far
down the line, I thought it was important for this group to discuss
the various options that are available to us.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal.
I
certainly agree with the comments that have already been made. I
think we are at a point where it is essential that we support the
Mexicans in this endeavor. But I don't think I heard the answer to
the question of whether we are getting the international support to
the tune of
that was mentioned earlier.

[raised]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That issue has been very recently
by Charlie. Why don't you [speak to that].

MR. SIEGMAN. We learned about the initiative for this
multilateral support arrangement around noon. We are in touch with
the BIS to alert them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
coming from Mexico?

The initiative, or the request, is

MR. SIEGMAN. From Mexico, right. We ourselves have not
received a formal request from the Bank of Mexico. This was done
through the Finance Ministry of Mexico. But we have alerted the BIS
that this is on the horizon. Part of the problem, we hear, is that
speed is of the essence.
If it is going to be helpful to Mexico at
all, they are thinking about this [being ready] by the weekend. So we
have informed [the BIS].
But [Mexican officials] have not contacted
anyone yet because [it's after] the close of business in Europe.
MR. FORRESTAL. Is the thinking at the Fed and at the
Treasury that if for any reason the international support did not come
along that we would go it alone and increase our swap line anyway?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would think so.
In fact, if the
international support did not come along, I think it would be all the
more important that we have some form of moral support coming from the
United States government.
MR. FORRESTAL. I would certainly support that.
is extremely important that we give them support.

I think it

MR. ANGELL.

I don't quite understand this
I thought a swap line was there to be used
when it needed to be used.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The Mexicans have $18 billion in front

of it.
MR. ANGELL.
[line increase]?

I know, so why isn't this just a straight swap

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mainly because that is [what]
requested.
In other words, it is at their request that
not on our demand.

they

11/9/93

-9-

MS. PHILLIPS. Would it go to some central source so that the
monies from all of these countries would then be in one pot?
Is that
part of this?
MR. SIEGMAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.
MR. SIEGMAN.

We would act as the agent, typically.
Okay.
[Unintelligible]

the account.

MR. ANGELL.
I just want to know what the legal distinction
is between a swap line where we say we will lend up to $2-1/2 billion
if you wish to draw upon it and one where someone
I do not understand that distinction.
MR. SIEGMAN. From the Mexican perspective it is the size of
the swap facilities [that matters]; it would have the announcement
effect.
MS. PHILLIPS.

So it increases their--

MR. SIEGMAN. It increases
community is supporting them.

[how much]

the international

MR. ANGELL.

I know, but why draw on it

SPEAKER(?).

It shows on their books as dollar reserves.

MR. ANGELL.

Oh, I see;

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

It's strictly window-dressing.

That is a little different.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
what they are requesting.
MR. SIEGMAN.

they want to go ahead and put it on--

It is the window-dressing issue; that's

If they draw it at all.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is a window-dressing issue they are
requesting. They are not requesting real funds.
MR. ANGELL.
Why don't they just request us to announce that
the swap line has been increased?
MR. SIEGMAN.
primary request.
MR. KELLEY.
traditional sense.

That is what they are asking.

That is the

Then they will not draw the money in the

MR. ANGELL.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think the reason for what may
appear to be not altogether logical, Governor Angell, is that the
capital flight that the Bank of Mexico is very much worried about is
the flight of capital owned by Mexicans. I would suspect that they
are probably better at [understanding] the psychology of their

11/9/93

-10-

countrymen than perhaps we are and that the existence of a pot of
money sitting presumably at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York would
be more likely to impress their fellow citizens than swap lines that
they wouldn't altogether understand. I think we are dealing with
posturing and flag-waving here in essentially a psychological battle.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The truth of the matter, if I were
looking at it from their point of view, is that it is not going to
make any difference to them whether
because they are not going to run through that [$18]
billion [in reserves] that they have. They are going to be forced to
float well in advance of that.
So, their actually drawing against our
balances is not even remotely conceivable. Therefore, they are asking
us for something where they are basically saying:

MR. MCTEER. This is Bob McTeer again.
I believe I heard
Charlie Siegman say earlier that this was just to alert us that this
[request] might come. Would we not have to approve this?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. As I understand it, [a drawing on]
the existing $700 million [swap line], because that line has already
been approved by the FOMC, does not require a specific vote, but it
does in a sense have to be "cleared" by the Committee. Now, don't ask
me what that term means; I asked and I got eyes glazed over. If,
however, we expand the swap line by $1.8 billion, then it does require
a vote of the Committee.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I think it would also
be a good idea, if the Committee [so] voted, that it give permission
for you and the [Foreign Currency] Subcommittee, which consists of you
and me and David Mullins, the authority to use that [enlarged
facility].
We have some limits on drawings; they can be no more than
$300 million in a given day, for example. Since the Mexicans do not
plan to use the funds, that limitation may not be particularly
relevant.
But if the Committee is going to authorize the enlargement
of the line, we might want to have them enlarge the use thereof,
because one could argue that if [the funds] were drawn down
then we would need the [clearance] of the
Committee because of the amount involved.
MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, this strikes me as a minimal
request on the part of the Mexicans.
I really do not think we have a
major hurdle to get over here. I think we ought to support them on
this.
From my point of view, given the way these international things
move--they move very quickly--I would be prepared to authorize the
subcommittee that handles this to have the necessary authority to
[activate] the $700 million and also to expand the line by $1.8
billion.
I'd give the subcommittee enough flexibility to deal with
this.
It is very awkward to get 19 people on the line in the midst of
an event like this that could move very quickly; circumstances change
sometimes by the hour if not by the 10 minutes. So, I'm in favor of
I also would like to
the substance of what is being [proposed].
facilitate a procedure of the kind that I just suggested.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say that neither Governor Mullins
nor Governor LaWare is here, but I spoke to them earlier and obtained

11/9/93

-11-

their proxies for whatever purpose we would need them. They indicated
they would be willing to go that far at this stage. I had not been
prepared to make that request at this particular moment, but I will
say that President Boehne raises an interesting question about how
these things move. Are there objections to moving in this direction?
MR. ANGELL.
It does seem to me that the Committee needs to
act on two [matters].
First of all we need to increase the swap line
from $700 million to $2.5 billion. If we decide to do that, that is
one issue. Then it seems to me we should authorize the [Foreign
Currency Subcommittee] to clear a drawing on the swap line

MR. MATTINGLY. Mr. Chairman, it might be premature to take
the first vote. You are not quite sure how much [they] want; it may
be more than [$2.5] billion. Isn't that right?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What is your read?

MR. SIEGMAN. The Treasury was talking about U.S.
participation of $5 to $6 billion. That is the order of magnitude we
are talking about, but [a drawing] is always subject to the conditions
and terms that we impose on it. Any enlargement [of the swap line]
does not mean automatic access. They still have to request [a
drawing].
The question is whether [the Committee] wants to give this
preliminary ex ante approval with judicious use of it, as President
Boehne suggested, or come back for another meeting at the end of the
week.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think we should give the Chairman
the full authorization of the amount that has been discussed so that
he can go about negotiating with the Treasury and with the Mexicans.
MR. SYRON. We have had too many problems in this whole
affair with having to go back and ratify things in a broad sense.
I would support what Bill McDonough just said.

So

MR. KELLEY. A question to Charlie.
If the Treasury decides
to go to $6 billion, will they be looking to us to go to $3 billion?
MR. SIEGMAN.
arithmetic is.

If participation is 50/50, that's what the

MR. KELLEY. While I am perfectly prepared to do either, we
are going to have to decide which.
MS. PHILLIPS.
MR. KELLEY.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Why don't we go up $2.3 billion [more].
It's $3.0 billion.
We already have $700 million.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Remember, in either case [the added
facility] is temporary. We are not voting on a permanent change.
When we say temporary, it means how long?
MR. SIEGMAN. The last time we had a special supplementary
facility it was for one year.

-12-

11/9/93

MR. ANGELL. But I do not understand why we should limit it
at all.
If it is going to be
It seems to me that at some point in time we have to face the real
question, and the real question is the drawing on the swap line-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

For real!

For real!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is not on the table.

MR. ANGELL. That is the real question. I don't think we
should be under any illusions that we might not have to face the real
question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that is correct. But it is
nowhere near on the horizon because they have a very large chunk of
cash [in reserves].
The only thing that is on the table at this stage
is this specific request. I am not sure we want to go much beyond it.
In fact, I am not sure that we want to approve it here.
MR. SIEGMAN.

You can make it shorter, too.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would be willing to go to $3 billion
but require--we could renew [the addition] if necessary--that it would
go back to $700 million after whatever [we deem] is an appropriate
time. A year is much too long.
MR. LINDSEY. Don't we have a critical day coming up?
Isn't
this whole thing a charade to get through next Wednesday? We are
trying to give a vote of confidence that our elected representatives
are unwilling to give. What we are being asked to do right now is to
cover the United States' foreign policy commitments because the House
I propose that we make it no longer than
of Representatives will not.
Wednesday because that is when the Congress is going to speak.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
months or so.

That makes it too narrow.

MR. ANGELL.

Yes, 90 days; three months is fine.

MR. KELLEY.

Right.

I'd say three

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Why don't we make it 90 days and
that would mean that we have an automatic period to look at it again
at either our December of February meeting in Washington?
MR. ANGELL. But why not go ahead and approve the additional
$2.3 billion in the swap line?
MS. PHILLIPS.

Why don't we say up to $2.3 billion [more]?

MR. ANGELL. Which [raises the total] to $3 billion.
gives the Chairman the backing within which he might want to
negotiate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

That

11/9/93

-13-

MR. ANGELL.

And then give the Chairman the authority to
if he deems it desirable.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you want that to be my authority or
the authority of the Foreign Currency Subcommittee?
MR. ANGELL.

The Subcommittee.

SPEAKER(?).

The Subcommittee.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.
Does anybody out there object?

That is satisfactory with me.

MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn. Given the circumstances, I
certainly support the operation and would be comfortable with a higher
limit. The only possible question, and it's a detail that I'd raise,
is this:
Given the political nature of the NAFTA issue, might we not
be better off if we let the Treasury take the lead on the announcement
so that we are riding clearly behind them?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it will be very clear in that
event that it is the Treasury's initiative, as indeed it should be.
[The Mexicans] approached the Treasury; they did not approach us.
MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the Treasury would be making
a mistake if the Treasury and the President do not use this in regard
to the vote.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In fact, I suggested at a meeting
yesterday that in the event that something of this
nature occurs, I would frankly be concerned about the position of U.S.
exports to Mexico, which is a very major [factor] in this whole thing.
Look, it strikes me that we have a consensus here and I think we do
need a vote on this. General Counsel.
MR. MATTINGLY. The vote will be then on a motion to
authorize the Foreign Currency Subcommittee to increase the swap line
from $700 million up to $3 billion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Yes.

Temporarily.

MR. MATTINGLY. For 90 days.
concurrence to draw on that line
view of--

And again at the Subcommittee's
in

MR. ANGELL. Virgil, I thought it might be more appropriate
for the Committee itself to increase the swap line.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Governor Angell, that's the way it
should be done, [I might say], since I used to have that job. The
FOMC should increase the swap line and then authorize either the
Chairman or the subcommittee to [act on a request to] use the swap
line so it isn't hung up [by the process of getting clearance from the
full Committee.]
Also, we renew all the swap lines normally at our
February meeting, so rather than 90 days I think we should adjust the
motion to take us through to the February FOMC meeting.

-14-

11/9/93

MR. BOEHNE. May I ask a question? If we follow that
procedure, does that mean that this action has to be released to the
public a week from Friday on our normal release day? And would that
present a problem?
MR. ANGELL.

I think the answer is yes.

MR. KOHN. Actually, I was just asking Norm Bernard that
question as you spoke, Ed. Normally that would be the case.
I think
that is the only argument I can see for not taking a formal vote. You
may not have to vote. Nothing may happen.
MR. SIEGMAN. We have not received the formal request from
the Bank of Mexico, for example.
MR. KOHN. You have had a thorough discussion, the Chairman
has the sense [of the Committee's position], and we can do [a
notation] vote by telex or fax or whatever modern invention we use
these days for that.
Then, if it is not necessary, nothing ever gets
announced because the Committee never voted on it.
MR. BOEHNE. Do we have to take a formal vote, say, to
delegate [authority for action] to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee?
Does that also require a formal vote?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes it does.

MR. KOHN. I think anything that would increase the swap line
or change the terms and conditions of the swap line would require a
formal vote.
MR. ANGELL.

As far as the minutes--

MR. BOEHNE.
My concern here is that this thing could move
over the weekend and it is conceivable that it could be difficult to
get a quorum of the Committee together. That is the other side of the
argument. What do you think, Mr. Chairman? Suppose we have this
formal vote that is now on the table, which actually I supported. Now
I am wondering about releasing it a week from Friday. Suppose we
don't need it? Is that a concern to you? How do you take that into
play?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the event that we don't need it, I
think it is best that we not have it on the record because moving
forward with this raises a very big question about the size of the
problem in Mexico. Suppose all of a sudden, for reasons that are not
clear to us, we find that the peso begins to firm and that this has
been a very short-run hiccup and the Mexican government manages to get
through this without any indication that they were on the edge of a
crisis.
If then we come out--

thorough
and that
whatever
next few
to avoid

MR. BOEHNE.
I think we ought to leave it that we have a
understanding that you have the authority to follow through
[you may call upon us] on very, very short notice through
means we can communicate with each other at any time over the
days. We probably should hold back on a formal vote in order
a potential embarrassment a week from Friday.

11/9/93

-15-

MR. ANGELL. I guess I am always uneasy when we in a sense
have voted to do something and then we decide not to vote to do it
because we do not want it to be public.
It causes me to come back and
ask:
What is the downside risk if the peso is stronger than we
anticipate and it is subsequently known that the Federal Reserve saw
fit to make a swap line available which was not used? My goodness,
the United States has a $32 billion swap line out there that we do not
use.
I do not see any downside risk.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. ANGELL.
increase it.
MR. LINDSEY.

Why did we increase it?
We increased it because we were asked to

We have not been asked to increase it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ordinarily, I am fully sympathetic with
the view that you mentioned. I have been on numerous occasions.
I am
not sure that this reaches the horizon that you are concerned about
because, indeed, we have not been asked. And we may inadvertently be
creating a problem for [Mexico], which would be unfortunate and would
be a mistake. We would then have to explain how bad things got.
If
they could have gotten that bad, even if they appear to be improving,
it raises questions about how stable the system may be.
MR. ANGELL. But then why not have another conference call?
Even if everyone cannot be brought together, why not have a conference
call and act when we are ready to act?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
agreeable to me.

That is fine; that is perfectly

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH.

It's agreeable to me, too.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't we do that then, okay? Thank
If we
you all.
Hopefully we will not have another conference call.
don't, we will see you at our meeting next Tuesday. Good night,
everyone.
END OF SESSION

