Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 18, 1993

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Tuesday, May 18,

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

1993, at 9:00 a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
McTeer
Mullins
Phillips
Stern

Messrs. Broaddus, Jordan, Forrestal, and Parry.
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Boston, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist

Messrs. R. Davis, Lang, Lindsey, Promisel,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, Siegman,
and Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open
Market Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Associate Director, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Small,
Section Chief, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. T. Davis, Dewald, and Goodfriend, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City,
St. Louis, and Richmond, respectively
Ms. Browne, Mr. Judd, and Mses. Rosenbaum and White,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston,
San Francisco, Atlanta, and New York, respectively
Mr. Eberts, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland

1.
Attended portion of meeting relating to a report on a study
entitled "Operating Procedures and the Conduct of Monetary Policy:
Conference Proceedings." edited by Marvin Goodfriend and David
Small. This two-volume study has been designated Working Studies 1,
Parts 1 and 2, of the Federal Reserve Board's Finance and Economic
Discussion Series.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
May 18, 1993
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. There are going
to be thunderstorms this morning, but I trust that we can integrate
them in an appropriate [unintelligible] that is in sync.
The
impression I get is that the authorities up above, knowing that this
is Jerry Corrigan's last meeting, have decided to let us know they are
aware of that.
If anyone can read the drumbeat as to whether it's pro
or con Jerry, please let us know. We, of course, are going to be
having a farewell lunch in Jerry's honor in Dining Room E after the
meeting.
Let me say before we start:
You may recall that a number of
meetings ago I raised some questions about the security of this
operation which--to use a kind word--was "dubious" for a while. I
think our record in recent months, indeed pretty much back to the end
of last year, really has been extraordinarily good. I cannot honestly
say that I have seen a comment that I would unambiguously read as
coming out of an FOMC meeting. I think you are all aware that what
will be going on here today has very considerable interest outside.
So, all I would suggest is:
Let's not lower our guard. Let's be
cautious, and I think we can fend off the clever endeavors on the part
of a lot of our media friends on the outside who will try to infer how
this meeting came out.
I don't request anything new; I think what
you've been doing is fine. Let's just have an awareness not to let
our guard down inadvertently.
I will raise some questions [later] in the proceedings when
we get into our discussions about exchange rates, concerning which I
have a memo from our colleague, Ted Truman.
I'd like to read it to
It relates
you so you will be up-to-date on what the issues are.
somewhat to this confidentiality issue but it's not directly in that
context, so I'll leave it for later.
Shall we start off? I ask for a
motion to approve the minutes for the meeting of March 23.
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Al Broaddus, I
assume, is available at the moment to give us a rundown on the very
interesting work with which his group has been involved.
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'll be brief and
just give a quick background. Members of the Committee will remember
that about two years ago at the July 1991 meeting it seemed pretty
clear that the economy was beginning to recover. And I think most
members of the Committee recognized that somewhere down the road the
Committee was going to be faced with the prospect of rising inflation
pressures and the possible need to change the direction of policy
toward restraint.
In the environment as I remember it, Governor
Angell asked a very reasonable and straightforward question, and that
was:
If and when that time arrived, would such a move be facilitated
by a change in our operating procedures away from the current
procedure of conducting policy by controlling the funds rate very

5/18/93

tightly? Would we change perhaps in the direction of a more automatic
adjustment of the funds rate in response to emerging inflation
developments or other economic developments or perhaps along the lines
of the nonborrowed reserve procedure we used between late 1979 and
late 1982? In any case, we got a group of System economists together
and we produced two volumes as your answer, Governor Angell. It's a
lengthy response but I think an interesting one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
what's in those volumes?

Is he going to have to take an exam on

MR. BROADDUS. I think I may have to take an exam on it at
some point! Actually, a shorter answer was delivered at the next
meeting of the Committee in August of 1991 when Don Kohn summarized a
memorandum that Dave Lindsey had prepared. That memo reviewed several
alternative procedures that might assist in the next change in the
direction of policy. Just very quickly: One set of those
alternatives would have deliberately caused somewhat greater movement
in the funds rate in the short run in an effort perhaps to camouflage
or disguise when an increase in the rate might be taken; this might
soften or at least stretch out the market and public reaction to the
move. The second set of alternatives would have involved tying the
funds rate, or perhaps a borrowed reserve instrument, in some way to
deviations of M2 from its target. The memo also noted that in an
automatic procedure we might want to substitute total reserves or
perhaps the monetary base for the funds rate as the operating
instrument. In any case, at that August 1991 meeting the Committee
discussed all of these alternatives. And, of course, the memorandum
pointed out that there were disadvantages as well as advantages
according to the tradeoffs involved. The Committee I think also
recognized that the current unpredictable behavior of M2 might cause
some difficulties with some of these alternative procedures that would
not have existed so much in the past.
In any case, all of this was brought out and in this
situation the Committee mandated a more broadly scoped study, similar
to studies that had been done along these lines in the past. We had
one in the early 1980s and another in the early 1970s. This broader
project was carried out in the second half of 1991 and the first half
of last year. It culminated in a very interesting two-day conference
at the St. Louis Fed in which 16 papers on this topic, along with
formal discussions, were presented. Economists from the Board staff
and all of the Reserve Banks participated in this conference. We also
invited two prominent outside monetary economists, Ben McCallum from
Carnegie Mellon and John Taylor from Stanford, to participate in the
conference--actually to comment on particular papers and in both cases
to give an overview. Both wrote papers giving their overview comments
on the research and its implications. All the papers prepared for the
conference, including the discussion papers and the Taylor and
McCallum papers reviewing the overall conference, are included in this
two-volume study. You should have received these volumes last week as
well as a summary of those proceedings, which I hope you will have an
opportunity to read if you haven't done so already.
As the summary indicates, the study did not attempt to arrive
at specific recommendations as to alternative procedures that the
Committee should adopt. I think we recognized rather quickly when we
got into this that it would be unrealistic to try to do that in this

5/18/93

study. What we tried to do was to lay a solid analytical foundation
on which such a discussion and decisions could be based. Frankly, we
concluded that we have produced a very solid foundation for that kind
of consideration if the Committee wants to take that next step; I
think we've covered the subject comprehensively. Many of the papers
used state of the art research techniques in reaching their
conclusions.
In any case, the summary document that you should have
describes several of the more formal papers in some detail and it
presents five broad conclusions. I'm not going to go through those in
any detail but let me just paraphrase them.
First, we studied the operating procedures in a number of
other major industrial countries. We found that most of them employ
procedures that are similar to those that this Committee uses but we
also found that some differences of detail exist. And if we take the
next step, we might want to consider whether there are any significant
advantages to adopting some of these procedures.
For example, I have
in mind something like the Lombard facility that the Bundesbank has
available.
Second, in view of the current problems with the monetary
aggregates as indicators of policy, in this study we looked at a large
number of alternative indicators of the thrust of policy and future
economic developments to see whether we might improve the execution of
policy by, in some more systematic way, taking account of some of
these variables in conducting policy. I have in mind here variables
like bond rates, yield curves, commodity prices, and a number of
others. Not surprisingly, no single indicator jumps out and says "I'm
the one on which you should focus all of your attention."
But we did
learn that certain indicators do seem to do a better job over
particular time horizons than others. So, we did a bit of filtering
that I think is useful there.
The third and perhaps the most important conclusion we
reached is that a case can be made that the Committee's current
procedure of adjusting the funds rate in response to a variety of
indicators can be used successfully over time to achieve the principal
objectives of monetary policy. I think a lot of people, like Dave
Lindsey, suspected that before the study was done. But the study
provides very important and very solid analytical confirmation in
support of that conclusion. However, and I can't emphasize this
enough, the effectiveness of our current policy regime depends
critically on the maintenance of the credibility of the System's
longer-term policy objectives.
Fourth, some model simulations that were done for the study
indicated that a feedback mechanism to guide policy might be of some
assistance in improving our results without creating a lot of undue
short-term instability. Several papers in particular looked at
feedback mechanisms where either a funds rate instrument or a monetary
base instrument would be [varied] in some systematic way in response
to deviations of nominal income from a target--for example, the
Humphrey-Hawkins projections that we put forth twice a year--that
might be set.
Fifth and finally, research done for the project indicated
that greater transitory deviations in the funds rate permit targeting
that would characterize some of these alternative procedures but not

-4-

5/18/93

necessarily be transmitted to greater variability in longer-term
interest rates. So, that possibility should not prevent us from
looking at some of these alternative procedures if we wished to.
In
any case, Mr. Chairman, those are the principal conclusions. Again, I
think this study positions the Committee to take the next step, and it
would be a fairly straightforward step of looking at particular
changes we might make. Let me take this opportunity to thank
everybody who was involved in the project but express particularly my
appreciation to Marvin Goodfriend and to Dave Small of the Board's
staff who did a tremendous amount of work in editing these papers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

MR. BROADDUS.
I'd be happy to try to answer any questions
anybody has and I'm sure Marvin and Dave could help me with some of
the more technical ones.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I must say I didn't have a chance to
read the fat books but I did read the summary, and it really is useful
in segregating the various types of problems that confront us.
I'm
not saying that I feel overly encouraged about different means that we
could employ other than what we are doing. I guess we all hope that
somewhere down the line we're going to be able to deviate from "funds
only," if I may put it that way, as a policy. But I think the type of
data systems that you set up for an evaluation will enable us to
continue until we can fundamentally come to grips with a view that
presumably for us [fed funds] continue as our optimum operating policy
procedure.
[Hearing none,] I guess
Questions for President Broaddus?
everybody has read the two books and all the questions have been
answered!
MR. BROADDUS. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, for the
opportunity to summarize the study.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And thank you very much, indeed. We'll
now move on to Gretchen Greene and operations of the Foreign Desk.
MS. GREENE.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. Let me just add
something about that intervention episode.
It resulted from fairly
close coordination between the Fed and the Treasury. When we began
over here to see the spillover effects on the exchange rate, on the
bond market, and on the stock market, the notion of a deterioration in
confidence became, I think, somewhat more evident than it had been
previously. We had been arguing here that we had a necessary
condition to get a response in the market from intervention because
the market did not expect intervention, meaning it was net short. And
in our discussions with the Treasury we suggested that a two-pronged
approach be initiated that day. One was to intervene moderately in
the market but visibly. This clearly came as a surprise to the
market; just watching the screens one could immediately see a variety
Concurrently, we knew that there were
of the shorts begin to cover.
opportunities for both Messrs. Bentsen and Summers to make remarks
that day, considering the fact that in the period immediately
preceding, the President--and obviously even earlier Secretary Bentsen

5/18/93

-5-

and Secretary Brown--had made comments which suggested, as Gretchen
pointed out, that there was perhaps some concerted American policy to
strengthen the yen. The truth of the matter is that no such policy
existed. These were in the nature of ad hoc comments by commentators
who were not discussing American policy, but really were observers of
the scene who concluded that history tells us that if the exchange
In fact, we
rate of the yen rises, the Japanese surplus will fall.
are not certain what would happen. Indeed, my suspicion is that if we
actually tried to create changes in exchange rates by consistent
intervention, the secondary consequences in the markets, mainly in the
expectations area, would very likely make the correlations which are
fairly robust between real exchange rates and current account deficits
break down. So, what we were trying to do was to indicate that these
comments were nothing more than academic discussions about
relationships.
I think we were about 20 percent successful, which is
about 10 percent more than I would have thought. But it came out
pretty well. In fact, I told [my colleagues] that I thought the
[outcome] that day was about as good as it gets in this endeavor to
intervene in the markets and not to expect that there is an easy
process here by which one can readily manipulate exchange rates. To
his credit Larry Summers, who is very knowledgeable about all of this,
has been very cooperative with us; he has made certain to keep us
fully informed about any issues and discussions that they have been
involved in, and we have tried to reciprocate. Hopefully, that
process will continue. Any questions for Gretchen?
Tom.
MR. MELZER. Gretchen, in the [written] report there was a
comment about the [market's] vulnerability to the dismantling of these
longer-term investment positions--and you just mentioned it in your
remarks--in Europe in particular. Do we have any sense of the
magnitude of that, what dynamics might drive a liquidation, what the
impact of that could be, and so forth?
MS. GREENE.
positions?
MR. MELZER.

Are you talking about intra-European investment
I'm talking about investment positions in U.S.

dollars.
MS. GREENE. Well, in reading the Greenbook last night I
noted that there have been some persistent foreign purchases of U.S.
government securities in the first quarter of the year at the same
time that there has been a continued very high level of U.S. outward
investment.
So, in effect, one could see this as financing our
capital outflow. The liquidation that I spoke of--the Japanese
investments--will probably at least in the first instance not be U.S.
dollars. Nevertheless, it had an effect on the dollar exchange rate
because they liquidated, let's say, Canadian dollar securities,
received Canadian dollars, and converted that to U.S. dollars; the
dollar was a means of exchange for getting back into yen. We thought
they were relatively easily shaken out of the Canadian dollar market;
there was also some Australian dollar intervention by the Japanese.
The market has been talking about the Japanese more as a vulnerability
than an actuality as far as U.S. bond markets are concerned. My
feeling is that, with the somewhat better climate that exists now in
the middle of May than existed at the beginning of April, they are
more secure now. But that's just a personal impression. Bill may
want to say something [on this issue].

5/18/93

MR. MCDONOUGH. Let me just add a footnote.
[In the period]
before the intervention that Gretchen described and the Chairman
commented on there's no question that the Japanese were not resisting
rumors in the market reminding the United States that Japanese life
insurance companies held a lot of rather long Treasuries and that if
they dumped them, the price to the United States would be rather high.
As soon as the intervention took place, all of that talk disappeared.
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, to what extent is it your
judgment that the success that day was due to the fact that it was
largely not trade or even capital fundamentals but senior
administration official statements that were driving the market?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Do you mean before or after?

MR. LINDSEY. Well, before having driven the dollar down and
that, therefore, we were successful with our intervention.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, remember, the statements came
after the intervention. The intervention was a perceived success, if
one puts it in those terms, before the statements were made. But I
think the statements reinforced it; that in large part turned around
the concerns that existed. It was probably not that it moved the
dollar higher, but that it may have forestalled an erosion of some of
the gains that had occurred earlier in the day as a consequence of the
intervention.
MS. PHILLIPS.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other comments?
Let me just take a
minute to fill you in on some comments that I heard at the Basle G-10
meeting the weekend before last and early last week. There was quite
an extraordinary number of subdued people in Europe; there is an
underlying fear that that system is continuously eroding. They are
continually revising down their estimates; they are talking as though
the upturn is somewhere off in the future, whereas earlier in the year
they were talking--in sort of government-speak--about the turn being
at hand and the official forecasts were [being revised] up. The mood
was really quite a good deal more subdued last week. They're
particularly concerned about the shortfalls in revenues impacting on
their budget deficits. The French were, I think, particularly
traumatized by that.
The mood is really very soft--if anything, the
worst I've seen this year. The British obviously are feeling somewhat
better, but even among the Brits a slightly hollow cheerfulness is
evolving.
In any event, let me turn for a minute to an adjunct on this
exchange rate discussion and read to you three points that Ted Truman
is recommending relative to our discussions about exchange rates.
It
comes basically out of the experience that we've observed first with
Secretary Bentsen, then the President, and then Secretary Brown. Item
one:
Exchange rates are like interest rates, and if a central banker
discusses one, the central banker will be understood to be discussing
the other. The best comment for the Federal Reserve is "no comment."
[Item two:]
We are going through a delicate period in terms
of exchange rates and, any talk, no matter how analytical, is likely
Even a "no comment" from someone
to take on exaggerated importance.
who has previously commented is a comment. My answer is that the best

5/18/93

way to handle that is to ask the reporter "May I go on deep
background?" Then, when they shake their heads, I say "no comment."
The new Administration, or at least those parts
Item three:
of it with which the Federal Reserve deals regularly, is sensitive to
the fact that talk about exchange rates, loose or any other kind,
tends to be unconstructive. While it would be foolish to think that
the Treasury Department would be able to shut down entirely all other
sources of Administration comment on exchange rates, it is somewhat
embarrassing if the Federal Reserve becomes part of the problem. Of
course, the Treasury from time to time may feel it is necessary to
make an official comment on exchange rates, but we hope that those
comments are deliberate and well considered. The recent record shows
that the Treasury is prepared to work with the Federal Reserve on such
occasions. That's the end of Ted's comments and I must say I fully
subscribe to them.
Let's move on. We have to ratify the actions taken by the
Desk with respect to intervention against the yen. I would ask
somebody to move it.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

I move it.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let's move to Bill
McDonough and the operations of the Domestic Desk.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions?

MR. BOEHNE. In the context of what the market views as good
news and bad news and how it might move the market, how would the
market react to a tightening of Fed policy in the near term?
MR. MCDONOUGH. Assuming it would happen soon enough so that
we have the present market conditions--the short end is priced on the
3 percent funds rate--the likelihood is that interest rates out to two
or three years would probably go up. I think [a tightening] would
probably bring the yield on the 10-year bond down a little because it
would be interpreted as the Fed being both active in fighting
inflation and very concerned about the economy. I think you would get
those two reactions. What it would do to the 30-year bond is really
hard to call.
If investors became convinced--making that distinction
I made earlier--that economic growth is likely to be low and that the
Fed is very concerned about inflation, my guess is that the long bond
would probably go up in price and down in yield. But at the present
time it's really being played essentially by hedge funds and various
other speculators, and in their hands it could go either way. It
would depend an awful lot in the longer end of the market on whether
the investors were back in.
If they were, then I think we would get a
flattening of the yield curve--short end up and longer end down.
MR. SYRON. Bill, what is in market expectations now in terms
of the deficit? There has obviously been some change in that, but I'm

-8-

5/18/93

trying to get some view of any likely disappointment or, conversely, a
pleasant surprise.
MR. MCDONOUGH. It has improved a little in the very recent
past by Mr. Rostenkowski getting the bill through the House Ways and
Means Committee in the shape that it did. And I think the market
assumption now is that the House will pass the Ways and Means bill.
Then it shifts over to the Senate, and the market is somewhat confused
about that.
There's no doubt that a fair piece of the rally through
March [reflected the view] that gridlock was not likely, that there
was a serious effort to reduce the deficit, and that the new
Administration had the kind of political skills that they showed in
winning the election. What has happened is that that view has flipped
a lot. The market went from thinking that the Administration could do
nothing wrong politically to a view that, well, maybe it can't do
anything too well either. So, I think one would [unintelligible].
But the pricing in the market--the fact that we're in the same trading
range--in my view would say that the market view is still that the
deficit reduction will happen.
MR. PARRY. You indicated that the market reaction to the
shortening of the maturity of the debt was muted. Was there much
discussion as to the motives for shortening? Has it been received
well by the market?
I know there wasn't much of a move in rates.
MR. MCDONOUGH. The general reaction has been that it was
motivated by the desire to reduce the deficit.
MR. PARRY.

Short term.

MR. MCDONOUGH. Short term. And since most market experts,
or at least so-claimed experts, advised against the move, they talked
to their [unintelligible] and said it was a bad idea.
It did not go
over well.
If not,
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Bill?
would somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).
Prell.

So moved.

Do I hear a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mike.

Without objection.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
MR. PRELL.
Chairman. I apologize for the unusual length.

We now move to Mike

Thank you, Mr.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, this is a very crucial period for
us. And even though Mike Prell went on at some length, I'd like to
weigh in and add to his comments. Let me just say in looking at these
data that I come out with the same concerns you do, Mike. The problem
that we're confronting is one in which we have to be able to
understand what is causing the price movements we are seeing here that
have deviated from our most likely expectations.
I think we can rule
out that the usual money and credit phenomenon is pushing inflation.

5/18/93

We can barely find the figures even though they've come up a bit; we
have a very faint pulse but not much more than that. You raised
interesting questions about the labor market slack issue and I do
agree that there's something there, especially the size of the defense
adjustment that's going on.
But there, too, it is rather tough in my
view, with the excess capacity especially abroad and the labor market
questions that we have here, to argue readily that there is something
of significance working. There are some elements that I think do
clarify the issue. One is that profit margins very clearly have been
rising, and rising quite significantly. In the context of coming off
rather weak demand, and a cumulative weak demand, it's pretty apparent
that there has been a considerable endeavor to restore margins from
subnormal levels and that this process is [being reflected in] very
formidable profit figures that continue to emerge not only for the
industrial sector but pretty much across the board. We probably
haven't run through that process as yet but it's obvious that the
higher profit margins get, the less they can be expected to continue
to move higher. And correct me if I'm wrong, Mike, but in the Board's
model, as margins rise, the pressures on prices fall.
The high
margins imply that we will begin to get softer prices as the momentum
from the rising margins ceases to be able to be carried through.
I
don't know if we're there yet, but there is something very
specifically there.
An issue you didn't discuss that I do think is of some
importance, but frankly I don't know the order of magnitude, is the
protectionism that has been emerging very subtly but in a pronounced
manner. There is no way to describe the steel price increases of late
other than [as a reflection of] protectionism. This is not an issue
of there being available supplies from abroad that are pushing our
prices down; but squeezing the amount of imports enables the domestic
mills to move their prices significantly higher. Needless to say,
they have done so with alacrity. And while [the importance of] steel
isn't what it used to be, it's nonetheless enough to have an impact in
the durable goods pricing structure that is visible. Remember that
almost by definition durable goods means "made with steel."
And that
really tends to spread [the effects] out in a particularly long line.
I don't now what the regulatory costs are but as we were
discussing in a Board meeting the other day, I'm sure that the
Disabilities Act has had some impact on costs. We view that and the
Clean Air Act largely in terms of capital costs and equipment. But
remember that on a consolidated basis capital costs become labor
costs.
And in a consolidated sense it doesn't matter whether the
pressure on the cost structure is from capital or direct labor because
we consolidate out materials; it doesn't matter one way or the other.
If in fact this is the type of inflation we are dealing with, it is a
stagflation type of inflation except for, of course, the profit
margins, which are very difficult to deal with. My [suspicion] is
that it's part of all this.
I do think the issue that was raised with
respect to inflationary expectations may be the most relevant
consideration here if what we are dealing with is a continued increase
in the general price level. That's because in all of our analyses of
inflation we endeavor to find the transmission mechanism by which the
actions of workers in the wage bargaining process and of managers in
price markups take place. The conventional wisdom in our models is
that [the transmission] is largely induced through changes in
psychology. That is, labor force and economic slack are supposed to

5/18/93

-10-

change people's attitudes. But it's only when those attitudes change
and indeed we get low [settlements in] wage contracts that the antiinflation process occurs. If we get the slack but nothing happens,
all we're saying is that something broke down in the process. That
essentially means that people--despite the fact that they're losing
their jobs and despite the fact that unemployment is rising--still
view the outlook as inflationary and they want wage increases. Or,
alternatively, it means that the business community--despite what we
would all view as a very weak economy--perceives that in fact the
economy is really strengthening and that they can get price increases.
And if their customers believe it, the price increases stick. But we
have to look at the actions that people are taking. Clearly, when we
get a PPI or a CPI we are looking at the end result of actions taken
by people. And the question is:
What is driving them? At the end of
the day it doesn't matter what is driving them if in fact they are
behaving in a manner that is bringing the price level up. This is
something that I think we will get into when we get to our policy
discussion. I hope it is where our discussion will take place because
if anybody seriously believes that we can move interest rates at all
in this particular context and [unintelligible] choke off
[unintelligible] inflation, I would say that history tells us the
chances of doing that are zero short of a 200 or 300 or 400 basis
point rise in interest rates.
So, the question really gets down to how we view this other
structure. Unless we are willing to abandon fully all of our notions
of what has historically created inflation--meaning forget the credit
aggregates, forget the slack market issues, forget all of the cost
pressures that occur as a consequence of regulations--we cannot
readily explain what is happening. Unless we're willing to forget all
of those elements involved in our ability to forecast--I don't see how
we can unless we abandon all intellectual rigor--as far as I can see
we cannot explain what is happening other than by this inflationary
psychology [process].
And that, in my judgment, may in part reflect
political questions as to whether there is stability in the system and
what the longer-term outlook is--whether in fact there are really
serious problems in the long term.
I do think the issue that Mike raised about accelerating
demand may be quite relevant. That is, we were going through the
second half of last year on an accelerating path and that could very
well have altered the basic expectations of everybody. And the
actions we are looking at, remember, are historical. The price
changes that occurred in April, which are our latest price data,
probably were made weeks before as far as planning is concerned. And
the only evidence that we have since then is that wage rates in April
have softened considerably. That is a somewhat useful cost
development. As you may have observed in the Greenbook, the Board's
staff is reducing [its projection of] the ECI, the employment cost
index, for the second quarter; it is down dramatically from the first
quarter. Therefore, the fundamental issue, as I read the Greenbook,
is that the essential thrust of this last acceleration is where the
inflation expectations are coming from rather than the politics or
anything else. If that explanation is true, we should find that out
within a reasonably short period of time. But I will tell you that at
this stage we are pretty much testing the limits of our theoretical
knowledge as to what the actual inflationary process is really doing.

5/18/93

-11-

There is also the obvious question as to whether the price
data themselves are creating problems for us. For example, a not
insignificant part of the April CPI is a big increase in owner
equivalent rent, which popped up. If one looks at owner equivalent
rent as a ratio to the quality adjusted price of homes--a sort of rate
of return estimate--that has been rising fairly significantly of late.
And that's not what one would expect in the rate of return; one would
expect it actually to be going in the other direction. Now, I don't
put much weight on either the numerator or the denominator of that
because, as you all know, the sample that is taken on owner equivalent
rent, which accounts for something just short of 20 percent of the
total index, is dubious and highly unstable. So, it is conceivable
that the implicit price forecast in the Greenbook is right; and that
would mean that all of a sudden the rate of price increase will slow
fairly dramatically. But I will say this:
The fact that Mike shows a
significant amount of humility [is] something that I think is relevant
to this type of analysis. All I can suggest is that anyone who in
their comments around the table can add anything to what we know about
this price process will contribute a great deal to our colleagues'
base of information, which as I see it is pretty slender indeed at
this particular stage. Who would like to start off?
MR. PARRY. Mike, when I look at the forecast of quarterly
growth rates for gross domestic product and inflation and compare it
to the previous forecast, I see a couple tenths weaker growth rate
It
throughout the entire period and a couple tenths higher inflation.
almost seems that a supply shock of some sort would produce this
because typically a model is constructed so that if the economy runs
into a slow period [the model] will pull it back--in effect make up
for that [slowing] within a relatively short period. But when there
is a supply shock, that's not necessarily the case. What, in effect,
did you have in mind that caused it?
MR. PRELL. Well, as I noted, we're trying to understand why
things have been going the way they have. Certainly, supply
conditions [are] a possible explanation. That was something that was
at least in our minds as we were doing this. But basically the bigger
driver in this was simply a recognition that the trends had not been
developing as we had anticipated and were carrying through higher
levels of inflation throughout and moderating somewhat further the
tradeoff; in a sense, we were getting less bang for the unemployment
[buck] from here on.
But it's very much a level adjustment that is
involved here.
MR. PARRY.
I can see that [you have made an adjustment], but
do you have any particular feeling as to why that tradeoff may have
changed?
MR. PRELL. Nothing more than what I suggested. It's not
going to [unintelligible] a separate matter from the tradeoff if you
feel that in effect the NAIRU has been raised. It is simply that the
gap is small-MR. PARRY.

Right.

MR. PRELL. The tradeoff could be affected if the
expectations formation process is different than the backward-looking
version that's inherent in a simple Phillips curve model. But again,

5/18/93

-12-

it's hard to say whether that's a level adjustment we're making or a
tradeoff adjustment. We simply tried to recognize the tendencies
we've seen and to be a shade less optimistic, going forward, about the
tradeoff between unemployment and disinflation. These are rather
small adjustments in a sense.
MR. LINDSEY. Thinking of a supply shock more broadly, one
would include in that an upward revision to inflationary expectations;
in a sense that would worsen the possible combination of output and
inflation.
MR. MCTEER. One thing that would account for both higher
inflation and a weaker real sector would be weather, and we know we
have had some bad weather. To what extent have you analyzed that and
figured out how many points could be attributed to that?
MR. PRELL. Well, we think it's probable that weather chipped
a bit off of the first-quarter growth. We could see some disruption,
some temporary loss at least, of output in industrial production. But
I don't see a correlation between those output losses and the price
pressures. I see it certainly in vegetable prices.
Clearly,
agricultural commodities have been affected by the weather and we see
it in their prices.
But I don't think the steel price increases that
were referred to earlier and the medical services price increases
recently had any significant weather element. So, while it's a nice
simple conceptual analysis to say "Well, we reduced the supply and the
prices went up," I really don't think that was what has accounted for
the uptick in the inflation trend.
MR. MCTEER. I was under the impression that the food
component was a pretty good chunk of it, though.
MR. PRELL. Well, in the overall CPI it was an element
recently. But we're really focusing on the core CPI, recognizing that
within a few months we should move back to normal supplies of fruits
and vegetables and then the price level of food should return to the
basic trend. So, this is not a significant element in our analysis.
MR. PARRY. We would really have to have a convoluted impact
on inflationary expectations to get the kind of effects that you have
with the weather.
MR. PRELL.
Indeed. Overall inflation undoubtedly is
important as well as the core in determining peoples' expectations
about the future, or what they perceive to be acceptable increases in
wages, and so on. But I don't think weather is the story here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I admit I don't understand the inflation numbers
very well but, in thinking about the discussion on profit margins,
maybe there is something there telling us about the degree of slack.
After all, those price increases seem to have stuck for whatever
reason. And maybe part of that has to do with the international
situation. Maybe foreign competition isn't as vigorous as it was
earlier; certainly something of that [nature] must be what is going on
in autos I would think.

5/18/93

-13-

MR. PRELL. But clearly we have had an exchange rate movement
and slack in the Japanese economy. Both of those things have tended
to boost the prices of Japanese automobiles and have provided an
umbrella for domestic manufacturers. They started off the year with
relatively generous incentives that held down the seasonally adjusted
prices.
They've been able to take those off; they raised a few list
prices. And I think this is certainly influenced by the developments
in the foreign exchange market. As the Chairman noted, in steel there
has been a marked reduction in imports and there has been considerable
pressure on supply in some parts of the steel market. There is some
uncertainty about whether that's going to persist in the coming
months. Of course, this will depend in part on decisions that are
made about protectionist measures. Basically, the improvement in
profits has largely conformed to the typical pattern of profits moving
up with an acceleration in activity and a related jump in
productivity. I assume we've had a rather typical cyclical pattern in
that respect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What, incidentally, is the accounting
addition of import prices on the CPI?
In other words, to what extent
are import prices affecting the CPI and in what direction?
MR. PRELL. Well, on net, there probably has not been a very
great influence to date. The Japanese automobiles are one story, but
exchange rates against other currencies haven't been adverse. So,
overall import prices have not been rising very rapidly at all.
In
fact, for the first quarter, non-oil import prices are estimated to
have declined. So I don't think to date that we've seen, overall, a
major unfavorable impact from import prices.
In particular areas it
has been a factor.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. In reading the Greenbook for this meeting and
listening to your comments and then thinking back over the analysis in
the Greenbooks over the last 8 or 9 months and the swings in sentiment
and developments as reported in various statistical [measures], it's
tempting to have a sense of security that we're in a sort of fail-safe
zone:
That in the longer term nothing much can really go wrong even
though we get surprised in the short run. We entered the fourth
quarter with an expectation of a quite weak quarter in nominal GDP and
real GDP with a 3 percent funds rate. And the surprise was that it
was a much, much stronger quarter than expected. During that quarter
as we were looking ahead to '93, the first quarter in particular,
there was an expectation of fairly strong nominal GDP growth and real
output growth; the surprise was that real output growth [in the first
quarter] was much weaker than expected. And by some measures prices
have been much higher than expected, yet we still have a 3 percent
funds rate. When I look at your forecast through '94 in terms of
nominal growth, real growth, and inflation it assumes a continuation
It is still the right number in spite of
of the 3 percent funds rate.
all of these developments. It seems to me--and this is where I'd like
you to comment on the way your model works--that when we have a
development like the first quarter and real output comes in weak and
inflation is reported to be much higher, it's not something to be
concerned about because it means that the real interest rate has
fallen or the natural rate or something because of the higher
inflation and that will take care of the weakness in real growth. But

5/18/93

-14-

out in the future because of the slack, the gap, the NAIRU or
something, inflation will decelerate; that will raise the real
interest rate so that no matter what happens it's going to turn out
that the 3 percent funds rate is the right rate.
I'd be curious as to
what it would take to persuade you that it's either too high or too
[Laughter]
low!
MR. PRELL. I think we all recognize the dangers of pegging
nominal interest rates.
It is not an automatic stabilizer. And if
the pattern has been relatively stable, it has been because of various
offsetting factors.
I would say that coming into the first quarter we
initially expected growth in the high 2 percent area for the quarter
with a lower inflation path. As things have turned out, we may yet
approach that real forecast but the price numbers clearly have been
unfavorable. Going forward, you are correct that--as we noted in a
footnote in the Greenbook--in essence the higher inflation trend and
what we would take probably to be somewhat higher short-run inflation
expectations than we had been expecting earlier do imply a somewhat
lower real short-term interest rate.
The question is whether at that
level we are providing sufficient stimulus to offset the fiscal drag
and other drags in the system now. Or perhaps, on the other side, is
this excessive monetary stimulus? As has been noted, we don't see it
in terms of rapid money growth on average. We don't see it yet in
terms of rapid nominal GDP growth. But in due course it's conceivable
that we would see that this [policy] was excessively stimulative. Our
sense has certainly been that as we move along there would likely be
some tendency for the real short-term interest rate to rise. But we
do have to recognize that at least out through 1994, if this fiscal
program is adopted, there is going to be a very large tax increase and
a very substantial amount of fiscal drag. So the point at which this
becomes an unsustainable real short-term rate may not be imminent; it
may be some time down the road. At least that's the implication of
our analysis.
MR. JORDAN. Can I follow-up, though, because you mentioned
the fiscal drag.
Isn't the argument that if the fiscal program is
adopted, we would get a lower inflation premium and more stimulus
coming from private investment and the household sector, even housing,
because of lower nominal interest rates than otherwise would be the
case? And thus the net effect of the fiscal action could be presumed
to be not restrictive at all.
MR. PRELL. The simple analysis might lead you to expect
lower real interest rates. But if you believe that inflation
expectations are based on either some primitive notion of how deficits
cause inflation or a more sophisticated one about the risks of future
[monetization] then, yes, we could get also some narrowing of the
inflation premium. In either case we would have had some offset from
the beneficial anticipatory effects of the fiscal action. We think
those are probably already behind us, but I'm not sure.
Back to the
question that Bill addressed earlier, what could happen here would be
an important, pleasant surprise that would be a big boost for the bond
market. At this point, I think people recognize that there's a budget
resolution out there with which they have to contend. Most likely
[Congress] will do something that at least nominally meets those
requirements. No one, I think, is anticipating a vastly larger or
vastly smaller deficit reduction than is currently being discussed.

5/18/93

-15-

MR. LINDSEY. Mike, this morning's Wall Street Journal said
that the health care package would involve a 9 percent payroll tax for
extending benefits--7 percent on employers and 2 percent on employees.
Assuming this were enacted, how would we think that 7 percent tax
would be reflected in terms of prices versus lower nominal wages?
MR. PRELL. Well, as I should remind everyone, our
presumption has been that even if this were legislated by sometime in
1994 the phase-in would be long and the effects within our projection
period would be almost solely those based on expectations. Our
presumption would be that an increase in mandated costs relating to
payrolls would be passed on only gradually to the workers in the form
of lower wages and that the hit would be primarily on the price side
in the short run.
MR. LINDSEY. Why wouldn't that be perceived as a positive
demand shock then?
Because it's either higher real compensation if
you lump workers and beneficiaries together and what you're saying is
that profits would eat it for a while. Why wouldn't that be a
positive boost for consumption?
MR. PRELL. Well, that depends on whether monetary policy
accommodates that kind of supply-side shock. Clearly, the monetary
policy response to that, as it would be to any other jump in exogenous
forces, is critical.
But if this provided opportunities for much
larger consumption of medical services to people, there presumably
would be some offset on the demand side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mike, I have two questions about inflation.
Being as puzzled as everyone else, I'm just wondering if there is any
information in the cross-sectoral look at where margins have widened
most. I'm just wondering whether that's more suggestive of this
regulatory, protectionist argument as compared to an ability to widen
margins because of demand. The other question is whether there is any
information on the expectations side--looking at the relative
deterioration of longer-term as compared to shorter-term inflation
expectations.
MR. PRELL. I don't think I can give you any useful sectoral
breakdown. On your question of the long-term versus short-term
expectations, could you repeat that one for me?
MR. SYRON. When you look at the surveys that show a
deterioration in expectations and try to get a handle on what is
driving the deterioration--and I'm not that familiar with the data-I'm just asking whether the deterioration has [been much greater] in
the longer run than in the short run and whether that would be
consistent with the general notion of some kind of political
deterioration, if I can call it that.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
general?
MR. SYRON.

Yes.

You're talking about expectations in

5/18/93

-16-

MR. PRELL. Our indicators of long-run expectations are
rather volatile from month to month and my sense is that in general
they haven't moved much recently. They came down some earlier in the
recovery, but recently I don't think there is a particularly
discernible trend. The Michigan Survey has bounced around in the 5
percent neighborhood. A survey that is a successor to the Hoey Survey
shows a similar pattern, except that it's more in the 4 percent
neighborhood, but I don't discern a big change there. On the shortterm side, what is notable is that we have not had any consistent
further lowering and there's perhaps a little firming if one wants to
read it very finely. But basically it has been a rather stable
picture even as we got into the 3 percent CPI increase area for two
years. That's the impression I have.
Let me go back to Governor Lindsey's question. I suppose in
general if people felt that they were more secure because this program
offered them particular long-term care and some other safeguards
against their wealth being depleted, then we could have in a sense a
wealth effect that could be positive for consumption in the short term
apart from the fact that the cost of medical services for some part of
the population might have been lowered.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike?
would somebody like to start the roundtable?

If not,

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I'll start with our District,
which continues to show a very moderate pace of growth.
In
agriculture, winter wheat is in good condition and our cattle feedlot
operations have rebounded from some winter problems. Construction has
bounced back from the winter-related slowdown; it now has strengthened
in all areas. In gas and oil, prices of natural gas have improved
from year-ago levels and drilling has leveled off.
I would point out
that drilling has not picked up and is not expected to accelerate
until there is more confidence in the price gains and that those
prices will be stable. Absent that, they are very reluctant to push
forward on any exploration or drilling. Manufacturing in our area
remains sluggish and it is consistently operating below capacity as we
hear from area business leaders.
Banking has been extremely
profitable in our region. Bank earnings are at record levels in the
first quarter. In fact, in Oklahoma banks have reported returns on
assets of higher than 2 percent.
Looking ahead for the District, we think moderate growth is
continuing. Despite some expectations that cattle prices will come
down and wheat prices may also, we still think income in '93 will be
at a level close to that in '92.
In construction, there is now a
whole pipeline of activity that bodes well for the summer in our
region.
In energy, although prices have risen we don't expect a lot
of activity unless those prices remain stable [or] rise. In
manufacturing, the possibility of a turnaround, as I've said before,
has been set back by some continued restructuring. As an example,
Boeing is laying off about 7,000 people in Wichita.
At the national level, we continue to expect moderate growth
and moderate inflation as we move through '93.
We expect GDP growth
of about 2-1/2 percent and inflation of just over 3 percent fourth
quarter-over-fourth quarter. I might add that an important reason we
scaled back our growth projection is because in talking with business

5/18/93

leaders around the District we heard a lot of anecdotal evidence
[pointing in that direction].
They are thinking about or have put
[plans] on hold because of expectations about taxes--particularly
Federal, but even the states are talking about very dramatic increases
in taxes.
So businesses are focusing now more than ever on cost
containment and trying to get their profits up.
I think this is one
reason businesses are raising prices; they want to see if the higher
prices can take hold. This has been complicated in the health care
industry because in some sectors, like medical devices, activity has
virtually stopped because of the anticipated health care program.
Also impeding renewed spending is this continued effort by businesses
that we've spoken about for some time to pay down debt and to
consolidate their positions in an environment of increasing
uncertainty. If I heard it once I heard it a hundred times in the
last three weeks:
Business people are very, very concerned about the
environment of uncertainty, so they are trimming back or are holding
back a little more than they would otherwise. Having said all this,
there is still a willingness to go forward where opportunities show
through in a strong way, as we're seeing in the western part of our
District.
So we pared back our projections--not quite as much as the
Board staff--to the 2-1/2 percent level for growth. Those are my
comments, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS.
The first-quarter data were quite
disappointing and we have gotten mixed reports for the month of April
so far in our District. But, in some contrast to Tom Hoenig's report,
I haven't really noticed any major change in attitudes about the
economic outlook either among our directors or most of our other
business contacts. By and large, I think they still expect continued
moderate growth both regionally and nationally through the forecast
horizon.
I personally subscribe to that view. I was a little
surprised by the size of the downward revision to the real GDP
forecast in the Greenbook this time.
I'm inclined to put a little
less weight on current fiscal developments in assessing economic
prospects than the Greenbook. It seems to me that the loss of the $12
billion stimulus in the President's package is not a really big deal
in a $6 trillion economy. And while uncertainty about fiscal policy
certainly puts a drag on the economy, it seems to me that this effect
is very difficult to quantify. I don't have a sense that the
uncertainty about fiscal policy is exerting any greater drag now than
it was at the time of the March FOMC meeting. So, all in all, I still
think that growth of real GDP in 1993 will be somewhere around 3
percent, as forecast in the March Greenbook, rather than the 2.2
percent that is currently projected in this month's Greenbook. And I
believe I'm right in saying that most private forecasters are still
somewhere around that number, although they may have revised their
forecasts down a bit in some cases.
For me, clearly the most relevant and most disturbing recent
development is the uptick in the reported inflation rate. The core
CPI rate, as I calculate it, now has risen at a 4-1/2 percent annual
rate over the first months of the year and that really bothers me.
I
recognize, as everyone else does, that temporary factors may account
for part of this; nonetheless, at a minimum the data strongly suggest

5/18/93

-18-

that inflation is no longer coming down. So we're no longer clearly
making progress toward our longer-term goal of restoring price
stability and we may have regressed a bit. And as Dave Lindsey and
others have pointed out, I think it's fair to say that inflation
expectations have probably been revised upward at least a little since
the beginning of the year. That's an interesting point because it
implies that real short-term interest rates are lower than they were.
So, in a sense we've had a de facto easing of policy as a result of
this development in recent months, and I would hope that we would take
some account of that in our policy discussion later in the meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions continue to
vary in the Twelfth District.
In California some evidence has
accumulated that the economy actually may have hit bottom in recent
months. We have seen, for example, that payroll employment is a
little higher than it was in December; and taxable sales also appear
to have bottomed out with increases experienced in the fourth quarter
of 1992 and the first quarter of 1993.
Nevertheless, we are faced
with significant further defense cuts, state and local fiscal
problems, and lingering weakness in commercial real estate that make
it unlikely that the California economy is going to grow at any time
in the next year. The Seattle area, which until recently was
expanding briskly, has stagnated in recent months.
I must admit that
recent new orders for Boeing aircraft are encouraging. The economies
of most other areas of the District continue to flourish. Utah,
Nevada, Alaska, and Oregon are ranked in the top ten states in terms
of employment growth between December 1992 and March 1993.
And even
the eastern Washington economy continues to be strong. Throughout the
West, and this is similar to what Tom Hoenig picked up, many business
leaders have noted to us that uncertainty about federal fiscal policy,
particularly tax policy, is delaying investments and other major
business decisions.
On the issue of inflation,
in general report
little price pressure, but there was one anecdote that I thought was
rather interesting.
and he reported that they periodically conduct a price
survey of packaged and canned goods. Now, this doesn't get into the
problem with fresh fruits and vegetables. At the wholesale level, the
latest survey revealed more widespread increases in the prices they
pay for these goods than they had ever experienced before.
The
interesting thing is that he went on to say that he doubts that they
will be able to pass those price increases along.
It remains to be
seen whether they will or not.
Turning to the national scene, it appears at least to me that
the changes in the Greenbook forecast since the last FOMC meeting are
large and, I'd have to say, quite disturbing. Real GDP seems to be on
a decidedly lower path and inflation on a discouragingly faster track.
Our own forecast is also more pessimistic in the short run, but by
1994 we have stronger growth than we had before and an unchanged rate
of inflation. The change to our forecast reflects the defeat of the
Clinton stimulus package, general concern about the extent of higher
taxes, and slower-than-expected growth in the first quarter as well as
the unexpected buildup of inventories. The change to the Greenbook
forecast would appear to result from more permanent influences in

5/18/93

-19-

addition to the factors that I noted. It would seem, if the Greenbook
forecast proves to be correct--and that certainly is a possibility-that the policy tradeoffs are likely to be far less attractive than
I'd earlier thought.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions in the Chicago
District have been somewhat uneven since the last meeting, but on
balance I think there has been an increase in the level of activity.
In a modest context the outlook is reasonably positive.
Starting with
the automotive sector:
Based on a pretty good April, the industry's
confidence in their forecast for sales in the second quarter and the
full year is somewhat stronger than it has been. Despite press
reports to the contrary, the inventory levels in their view are
currently just about right and, therefore, second-quarter production
schedules have been set about 10 percent over last year. And they are
pretty confident about those production schedules.
I must say the
mood in Detroit is much more positive than it has been and that is
radiating pretty much throughout the dealer organization. The truck
business also continues to improve.
Orders for the Class 8 units, the
large units, were strong in the first quarter and that has continued
into the second quarter. For the full year the industry is
forecasting an increase in sales of the big trucks of from 17 to 18
percent. Also, and something of a change, there has been a recent
increase in the medium truck category, the Class 5 to 7 units, and for
the full year they are now forecasting an increase in sales of some 13
percent for those. Medium truck sales are viewed as something of a
lagging indicator and, therefore, this turn, which generally occurs
about 6 months after the change in the heavy truck category, is viewed
as a good sign. But despite the strength in the underlying auto sales
rate, I must say that truck prices really have not been increased.
The steel business continues to do well and is benefiting
particularly from the improved level [of activity] in the auto
industry. The current order rate for one major company, which they
expect [to continue] for the full second quarter, is coming in at
about 110 percent of capacity. This is down from the first quarter
but still pretty strong. Some of the order rate they [feel] is due to
the current labor negotiations; nonetheless, the underlying demand is
pretty good. And based on this they are now forecasting shipments
this year of some 87 million tons, which comparatively is an awfully
good year. We've talked about the steel price increases at previous
meetings and again earlier today. There is, as you know, another
increase scheduled for July. They would expect that to stick. But I
do think it's important to remember that these increases do not apply
to the major purchasers who are buying the steel on contract. Those
prices are still very, very tight, and it's particularly true of the
auto industry. But for others who are not buying on contract, when
we're all done here this increase is going to amount to about 12
percent.
In the agricultural equipment business, sales of tractors and
combines have been higher most recently and production schedules,
therefore, have been increased. The large manufacturer that I talked
to expects their production for the full year to be about 9 percent
higher than last year. Also, there has been a recent increase in
construction equipment; it has been slow to get off the mark but some

-20-

5/18/93

of those orders are beginning to pick up. One very major manufacturer
is now selling a number of its product lines on back order.
Retail sales are uneven and this, I think, is heavily driven
by the terrible weather that we had in March and April. As for car
[sales], retailers tell me that their sales this year are up about 5
to 6 percent from last year.
In the ag sector, as you know, we had a
very wet spring and planting, therefore, has been terribly slow. But
conditions looked pretty good last week and they got a lot done; that
is true I will say with the exception of Iowa, which is still very
wet.
But they're still well behind and for the major states planting
is at about 40 percent of the normal level. Nonetheless, there's
enough time left and most people expect that there is a good
opportunity to get a good crop. Perhaps one of the most significant
changes, at least to me, has been a decided change in the attitude
about lending by banks. People tell me, both borrowers and banks
alike, that banks have become more aggressive. They are now actively
seeking loans and are pretty much out looking for business; they have
begun to shave rates, but I am assured that they have not begun to
ease their credit standards.
In a national context, while the improved level of activity
may relieve some of the concerns I've had about the sustainability of
this expansion, I still think the big imponderable is on the
employment side. Major companies--and I must say everyone I have
talked to in the manufacturing sector--say they will continue to
reduce their employment and will produce more products with fewer
people. At some point it does seem to me that the lines between
overtime and an increase in demand will cross, but so far they just
are not yielding. And almost surprisingly, some of the unions don't
want the companies to hire more people either. But despite this
improved tone both in the District as well as in the national economy,
it does seem to me that at best we are talking about a pretty modest
recovery. If you look at the staff forecast, which is largely in line
with ours, the outlook continues to be positive but in a very, very
modest context.
On the price front, in talking to people I just don't sense
the upward pressures that the recent numbers might suggest. Yes,
there are some exceptions, such as steel, and for the reasons that we
talked about; but there are some offsets.
Raw aluminum prices, for
example, are at the lowest real level in history. Labor contracts
continue to be settled on favorable terms that are, I think, very much
noninflationary. For example, the steel contract is a long way from
settlement, but so far the thrust of the discussions has been entirely
in the work rule area and productivity. Companies want to improve
work rules to achieve more productivity and they are willing to give a
little in terms of employment security. On the economic side the
discussions really are focused on pensions, not on wages. Therefore,
the steel industry hopes that they will come out of this [negotiation]
without an inflationary settlement. So, although the recent numbers
are a little unnerving, I do think it's far too soon to conclude that
we are experiencing a basic shift in the outlook for prices. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

5/18/93

MR. MCTEER.
In case some of you missed it, I'm pleased to
report some good news from south of the border. The government of
Mexico has submitted a constitutional amendment to give independence
to the central bank, the Bank of Mexico, and to make price stability
its overriding objective. The way they worded it was that the main
mandate of the Bank of Mexico over any other objective will be to
preserve the purchasing power of the national currency.
In the Eleventh District we've seen some modest weakening in
the numbers and some deterioration in the tone of the anecdotal
information. It's somewhat more negative, primarily surrounding
uncertainty over the future. Projects are being put on hold because
people are waiting to see what the tax situation is going to be and
[what happens regarding] certain government spending situations and
also health care reform. And probably somewhat unique to our area, we
also have some slowdown related to the diminished prospects for the
passage of NAFTA.
On the national economy, I really don't have any helpful
insights to offer. I don't understand this recent split in the
economy with the real sector seeming to turn down and inflation
seeming to pick up at the same time.
It's a mystery to me. On the
nontraditional source of the inflation, however, and not being able to
find the pulse of money and credit growth, it's probably because we're
still trying to find that pulse on the balance sheet of banks. When
we talk about the money numbers and what's going on, I think it's
fairly clear that there is liquidity out there and there is money out
there; it's just not where we used to measure it.
I think we haven't
quite made the adjustment when we're talking about inflation to
realize that it's probably there in that context as well. That's all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, things are looking fairly good in
the Sixth Federal Reserve District. Economic activity in the area has
continued to expand in the early months of this year. And perhaps
more significantly, the expansion is now fairly broad-based since it
has spread to several industries that previously had been lagging,
namely financial services, communications, and manufacturing. As the
expansion has become more widespread, a number of long-standing fiscal
problems of the states in terms of their financing have begun to ease,
and I think that will have implications as the federal fiscal policy
emerges.
The manufacturing industry has benefited from fairly good
activity in single-family housing and the continued surge in activity
due to hurricane rebuilding in south Florida. The auto assembly
plants in the District, especially the Saturn and the Nissan plants in
Tennessee, are operating at very high capacity. And this jump in
manufacturing activity in the first quarter has led to considerable
job growth in the District. In fact, the Southeast accounted for over
half of net manufacturing jobs added to payrolls for the nation in the
first quarter. Even the depressed extraction industry in Louisiana
has turned around and, as natural gas prices have increased, activity
off the Louisiana shore has risen to levels we haven't seen since
1985. The generally good performance around the District is dominated
by Georgia and Florida, where sales tax receipts have been very
strong; but other states have seen improvements as well. As I've
indicated, even Louisiana is beginning to emerge from the doldrums.
So, [the improvement] is not only broad-based in terms of economic

-22-

5/18/93

sectors but geographically as well. Now, this better performance than
the nation may not continue very long because the activity due to the
hurricane rebuilding will begin to slow.
The one serious negative note that I've picked up--and it has
been referred to before--is the uncertainty about the fiscal and
political situation. Tom Hoenig heard it 100 times; I think I heard
it 110 times in the last three or four weeks.
It's ambivalent in the
sense that the business people in the Southeast, as reflected in my
report, are fairly optimistic about their own businesses and what
might be emerging in the economy. Or to put it another way, they're
not unduly upset about the first-quarter numbers. But this
uncertainty about the fiscal situation may very well begin to be
reflected in business investment and employment plans for the rest of
the year. Business people are telling me constantly that they're not
able to begin to do their business planning because of the fiscal
situation and the health care problem.
In spite of the good economic activity and in spite of the
inflation numbers that have been reported, I don't hear anybody
talking about price increases at all.
They're not seeing them at the
wholesale level and to the extent that any of them have tried to pass
any prices increases through--the minimal increases that have
occurred--they are not able to make them stick. At the same time
there are no wage pressures at all that I can tell.
The credit situation seems to be improving. Banks are
reporting higher loan demand, particularly in the consumer sector, but
they also are seeing better demand in the commercial area.
Looking at the national situation, our forecast shows a
continuation of the moderate rate of expansion that we've had over the
last year. Like many others we've revised our forecast down, based on
the first quarter primarily, and we're looking at growth in real GDP
of about 2-3/4 percent for this year, which is about 1/2 percentage
point lower than our previous forecast. Overall, it seems to me that
the outlook, despite that reduction, is pretty much the same--with the
continued working off of imbalances and the slow employment growth
that we've referred to before. We see the economy as somewhat
stronger than the Greenbook and this divergence continues after the
second half of the year. The difference for the most part is in the
area of consumption expenditures, where we see more strength; and we
see more inflation notwithstanding slow employment growth. I wouldn't
want to over-emphasize these differences, however. I think our
general path is fairly consistent with that of the Greenbook. I
certainly don't have any insights into the inflation numbers. I'm
Thank you.
perplexed, as I guess most other people are.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. The economy of the District continues to improve.
There are some signs of life now in nonresidential construction. A
lot of it is public construction, but it looks like that sector is
poised for a pretty good year in many parts of the District. Consumer
spending appears to be continuing to grow and business out at the Mega
Mall has held up very well.
In agriculture, the livestock business is
very healthy and very strong. With regard to crops, there is the
concern about moisture but, of course, it's always either too dry or

5/18/93

-23-

too wet. This year apparently it's too wet but I have a hunch they'll
still [be able to plant] most or all of their crop. There are also
some renewed signs of life in the energy business. Exploration and
leasing activity in western North Dakota and eastern Montana are
starting to show some signs of life, and iron mining activity in
northern Minnesota is expected to pick up as a consequence of the
improvement we're seeing in the domestic steel industry.
The one thing I might comment a little further on is what's
happening to employment.
It's something that, of course, shows up in
the data, so I think we're aware of it.
But I've heard a couple of
comments lately that have put this very directly. Employment is up in
the District. And yet if we talk to business people, they say they're
clearly trying to do more--or at least the same--with less when it
comes to employment. Part of that has to do with fringe benefit
Part of
costs, such as workers comp and insurance and health care.
it, I think, is expectations in that businesses that used to think
they were going to make at least some of their higher incomes over
time through expansion are revising down their expansion plans. That
has to do in part with environmental restrictions and other
regulations.
I think they're concluding that the way to improve
profitability is through very tight cost containment, and they seem to
be succeeding. And that has affected employment, certainly in the
District, and perhaps nationwide as well.
With regard to the outlook for the national economy, my
principal concern, as many have commented, is the inflation situation.
I am not as sanguine as the Greenbook that inflation is going to
decelerate from here. I certainly agree that a lot of the
fundamentals we typically look at--slack in the economy, money and
credit growth, and so on and so forth--don't seem to suggest an
environment where inflation ought to be accelerating. In fact, they
suggest an environment where further deceleration is likely. Yet I
remember from the 1970s that we're always pretty good at explaining
away inflation but those [situations] don't seem to have happy
endings. So, I'm very uncomfortable with what we're seeing and I'm
not convinced that what is going on now is simply temporary and will
self-correct.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Most of the business people I talk to feel
deprived in terms of price increases. They feel they are owed price
hikes if only they could make them stick. If you look at it from an
individual business person's point of view, their sales growth for the
most part has been slow, competition has been tough, they have cut
costs and lowered their break-even point, and they still feel very
squeezed. So it's not surprising that they would jump at whatever
opportunity they can to raise prices, whether it's a streak of good
orders or a weaker dollar and foreign competition that isn't quite as
tough or an attempt to get ahead of the regulatory or tax changes.
It's not surprising that that is happening and that that's the way
they feel. The question is whether it is broadly sustainable or
cumulative, and I don't think any of us really knows. But my hunch is
that it's not, given the generally sluggish economy, the underlying
competitive situation, plus what is going on in money and credit.

-24-

5/18/93

Looking at the District economy, growth is very modest, very
modest indeed. Retail sales are going up negligibly. Industrial
production, while still advancing, seems to be advancing at a
decreasing rate. We have sluggish loan demand, or flat loan demand
really, and slow job growth. And, as has been mentioned almost by
everybody, there is slipping confidence and building anxiety in
national leadership and all the uncertainty about taxes. Every day in
the paper some other tax that might [be enacted] is mentioned, and
that has really pulled the rug out from any kind of increases in
spending. There is just a strong desire to hold tight and steady and
to put on hold everything that one can.
My sense on the national economy is that, yes, we are going
to get somewhat more inflation than we thought earlier this year. And
I think we're going to get somewhat less growth. But my basic
conclusion is that at this point it's more a matter of degree rather
than a fundamental shift.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the District
goes, the situation remains mixed. I'd say it's soft, but not
collapsing, and to some extent the overall tone is almost improved.
In the job market, employment isn't increasing but it's stabilizing;
hours are up. Hiring of temporary help is up a good bit, along with
all you've heard. We are still having major layoffs, though, in some
areas and an overall softness in the employment market.
In retailing,
like everywhere else, the weather impact was particularly severe.
Some bounceback from that occurred but there was some renewed
softening more recently in retail sales.
The same weather pattern
holds for autos, but auto sales have been making up their losses and
remain quite strong. Housing activity, particularly at the lower end
of the market, is quite strong, with prices actually rising at that
lower end for houses selling for less than $150,000.
The rest of the
market is still fairly soft. The commercial real estate market is
flattening with vacancies stabilizing but values are still quite soft.
If you want another worry to add to all of this, you can talk
to people in the financial services industry, particularly the mutual
funds. They continue to have very, very strong inflows into bond
funds, junk bond funds, and other [investments].
Everyone takes the
money, but at the same time they express continued concern about the
sophistication of the investors, particularly that in a lot of cases
people are not really aware that they can lose some capital in those
bond funds.
Also, a lot of concern is being expressed about how clear
people are when they buy these funds in banks that the value of these
instruments is variable, not just the yield.
As far as manufacturing goes, the situation is mixed.
Anything tied to autos is doing all right; the same is true of
environmental [firms].
But in defense we see more and more of a
slide; it's continuously softer. Like everyone else, we hear
continuous complaints about uncertainty and what is going to happen.
I had some people in the other morning and one fellow said his company
was not going to do anything they don't have to do and that every CEO
he knows is absolutely frozen until he can see where things are going.

-25-

5/18/93

Unfortunately, as far as the national economy goes, I'm
pretty much in agreement with the tone of the Greenbook that--excuse
the colloquialism--it's just a plain lousy situation that we have
here. Like everyone else, I'm very disappointed about the price
situation. If it was just one month it would be one thing, but it has
been longer than that now. I really can't understand what is going
on; I find it hard to believe that the fundamentals don't have
something to do with this in the longer run. And, if anything, the
economy right now seems softer than six weeks ago at the time of the
last FOMC meeting, [based on] retail sales control, [initial] claims,
and industrial production. But having said all that, I don't have a
whole lot of conviction. There is an enormous amount of uncertainty;
and to some extent it seems with these concerns about taxes and other
things that [people] are almost trying to jawbone the economy down,
not in a purposeful sense but in the "if" effect it is having. And in
that environment, it's hard to have very strong convictions about the
intermediate-term [outlook for] either output or prices.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I have one disagreement with the
Greenbook. The Greenbook implicitly has a reduction in inflation from
a 4.6 percent rate over the first four months to 2.6 percent in the
next eight months in order to get to the new higher inflation
forecast. Again, I respect the talents of the people involved, but
that seems like an awfully steep deceleration of inflation in order to
I think the
get to the new [forecast of] 3.3 percent for the year.
reason that we've had the higher inflation was well argued by you, Mr.
Chairman. It is expectations-based. You ran through a better list
than I could:
mandated benefits, strike replacement, calls for a
higher minimum wage, re-hiring of workers; that's for labor. For
management, there's protectionism, protectionism, and protectionism
along with loan guarantees for our failing industries such as
airlines. So, no matter whose side you're on, labor or management,
there is Uncle Sam to stand behind you.
You asked for another reason why inflation might be there.
I'm going to give it to you.
I don't mean to say that this is a
dominant reason. It's not one that people in this room are familiar
with. It goes back to the redistribution of income literature.
I
doubt many people in this room are readers of "Nation" or "American
Prospect."
I would hope not anyway. I read this literature some
years ago as part of my research for my doctoral dissertation. You
can also look up Ira Magaziner's writings on this.
The most unspoken
part of the health care plan is its redistribution elements. Right
now, effectively, health care is a lump sum tax. It's $4,000 per
worker on the payroll, paid over to the health insurance company.
What is going to change, and the only question is to what degree, is
that it is now going to become what is effectively a proportional tax;
it's payroll based. Those are very different because income is
distributed [unevenly].
Now, when we are talking about a shift of 14
percent of GDP in the income among various quintiles, that will dwarf
whatever Reagan has accomplished by a big factor, and in reverse.
There is a good reason to believe--in fact I can argue four
reasons--that at least in the intermediate term such a redistribution
is likely to be inflationary. The first comes from the higher tax on
the wealthy. Now, in the short run at least, we would expect some of

-26-

5/18/93

that higher tax to come out of savings. That might not be true in the
longer run; but certainly in the short run the part from the higher
taxed people will come out of savings. On the other hand, for the
lower taxed people it's more likely to augment consumption. So on the
demand side the redistribution effect of the burden of health care
costs is liable to increase demand via increased consumption. On the
supply side there are also two reasons to suspect inflation. The
first is the "classic" supply side argument that when you move from a
lump sum tax to a proportional tax what you're going to get is less
output. And if you think about both the substitution effects and the
income effects, they're both going in the same direction. I'd assume
that with, God forbid, another 9 percent payroll tax, the typical
worker will be pushing 50 percent as a marginal rate. And people in
this room will probably be at around the 65 percent area for the
marginal rate. That is a whopping substitution effect. On the income
effect side, if you no longer have to work to service a $4,000 bill,
you will get less work on the other end as well. The other supply
side reason why an intentional redistribution is liable to be
inflationary has to do with the Keynesian argument about nominal wages
being sticky. Effectively, a low cost worker for whom [a firm is] now
paying $4,000 in health care is entitled to a raise. And the unions
representing that individual certainly will make that point. So, I
think nominal wages will rise at the lower end. Indeed, it will
reverse probably two decades of declines in real wages at the lower
end. On the other hand, for those who are taxed more--who will cost
management more to hire--[firms] actually would have to force a
decline in the nominal wage of those people. That would involve, say,
middle management on up. In a 7 or 8 percent inflation environment
that would be easy. You'd simply hold nominal wage increases down.
In a 3 percent inflation environment, you're not going to have nominal
wage cuts.
So, what you're going to have is a bit of a wage/price
spiral, with rising wages for workers and insufficiently falling real
wages for management.
So, for all four of those reasons--again, one
can go back in the literature even from the '20s about redistribution
and its effect on inflation--it all adds up. Now, I'm not saying
that's what is causing it.
But we all know the health care story is
on our minds and it might be one reason at least to explain why,
[given] the supply shock, the higher [inflation] expectations might
actually turn out to be rational.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. First of all in terms of the District, the
unemployment numbers I'm going to report are really the best numbers
I've seen in a good while. We had payroll employment growth in the
most recent three-month period, which would be through March, up 3.8
percent in the District. Another notable change [is that] we've been
getting marginal growth in employment. And certainly the St. Louis
District in general has done better than the nation through the
recession. Another shift has been that we're getting more of the
growth through manufacturing. That was actually up 4.8 percent, with
particular strength in electrical equipment and transportation
equipment; it was up somewhat less in nonmanufacturing, 3-1/2 percent.
And there is considerable strength in construction. It's somewhat
stronger in residential in terms of contracts and significantly
stronger in nonresidential for that most recent three-month period.
Notwithstanding that, as I talk to people around the District, I don't
get the sense--in terms of the tone of comments--that people think

5/18/93

we're in any kind of a boom. And I'm hearing the same concerns others
have expressed regarding uncertainty about fiscal policy and other
government policies.
With respect to the national picture, in thinking back to the
second half of last year when real growth came in at around 4 percent,
I'm struck by the fact--just thinking about where we are now and where
we thought we were then--that the economy is fundamentally in a lot
better shape now than it was then. We are getting some job growth now
which we weren't getting then. There were considerable uncertainties
at that time and, indeed, there are uncertainties now. But in some
ways they were even greater at that time. The whole financial
restructuring process has proceeded further. I think one has to
assume that we're in better shape in that sense. And the anecdotal
reports we've heard around the table today in general are better. As
Mike Prell acknowledges in the Greenbook, there is a possibility of
the first-quarter GDP being revised up. But I think it's a little
dangerous to put too much stock in one quarter's GDP numbers. We
could actually be surprised in retrospect in terms of how well things
are going now.
As some others have mentioned, notably Al Broaddus and Gary
Stern, my principal concern is on the inflation side. I, too, am
skeptical as to whether or not we will resume the disinflationary
trend we seemed to be on. And I think the experience of the first
four months of this year has definitely had an impact in terms of
expectations. In terms of why that could be, it seems to me there is
an explanation relating to money and credit, though not one we in this
room generally put a lot of stock in. We had M1 growth over the last
two years through the first quarter at double-digit rates.
I guess
I'm not prepared to try to translate that into what it may mean
exactly in terms of real growth and prices, but I view that as a very
substantial monetary impetus. As that growth slowed very dramatically
in the first quarter it gave me some comfort that perhaps the general
thrust of policy had shifted somewhat. But what I'm seeing as far as
Again, this is only a
M1 projections looking forward [concerns me].
month or two, but for May we're talking about a possible 25 percent
annual growth rate in M1.
It may be that what I perceived as a
significant sea change in the thrust of the growth in that aggregate
in the first quarter of this year was really only a temporary pause
and that we're still on a very strong upward trend in terms of
monetary thrust. We're probably not compelled to act now, but if
these inflation expectations become embedded and the first-quarter
[inflation rate] turns out stronger than people perhaps think it is
now and if real growth is stronger, it's just going to be harder to
catch up later. So, my principal concern relates to developments
we've seen in the wage and price climate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I find the recent indicators of a
possible intensification or rekindling of inflation very disturbing in
the context of our stated objective of price stability, which I
believe is the proper objective for this institution. The question,
it seems to me, is whether this is the time to take the punch bowl
away before everyone but the host gets drunk and the party gets rowdy.
The timing of any tightening of policy is critical. It must be early
enough to stop inflation before it gains momentum but it must also be

5/18/93

-28-

late enough to be based on reality and not just intuition.
In the
current situation it is hard to make a substantive case, in my
opinion, that a real inflationary trend is under way rather than the
effect of simultaneous aberrant one-time influences.
By contrast, I
believe that a case can be made that the apparent slowdown in growth
is a result of collapsing confidence on the part of both consumers and
businesses in the extremely uncertain environment created by record
high proposed tax increases, large proposed [defense] cutbacks, and
fundamental change in a health care system that was basically
established in our culture more than 30 years ago. Consumers and
businesses continue to be more interested in debt reduction than in
re-leveraging with long-term commitments.
It can't have escaped any
reasonably intelligent observer that the economic proposals that are
before the Congress right now are essentially contractive. A
premature move to tighten policy against that background could be
disastrous to economic growth and could run the risk of reigniting
enthusiasm for fiscal stimulus rather than deficit reduction and
budget discipline. In that scenario the inflation fat would really be
It seems to me that this is the time to hold to
in the fire again.
our present course at least long enough to have a better idea of what
Congress will do with the President's proposals and what the effect
will be on economic growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, with the emergence of the most
recent data, it seems to me that we now have before us about the
widest spectrum of fundamentally conflicting possibilities that I can
remember. I have attempted to make a bit of an inventory of what
those possibilities are and what some of their implications might be,
If we were to make a straightjust to help my own thinking along.
line projection [based on] the most recent data, we'd wind up with
stagflation, which obviously would be a very serious situation. But
there are a number of other possibilities and each carries a different
set of implications.
In the area of real economic activity, I think
there may be two basically credible paths we could find ourselves on.
The first is that the first-quarter data are signalling an emerging
decline--that things are indeed beginning to go back downhill and that
we might even be looking at the possibility of a new recession down
the way. That's possible but it seems to me highly unlikely. We have
a good bit of momentum going; jobs are being formed net of all the
restructuring that's going on; new claims are flat; the credit crunch
is easing; the consumer is returning; our competitiveness is improving
through productivity, which is the good way, and through a somewhat
softer dollar in some cases, which may not be so good a way.
Nevertheless, competitiveness is [improving].
So, I would doubt that
what we're looking at is a fundamentally weaker economy that is going
downhill.
But if that is what emerges, then we're going to have to
reverse a lot of the thinking we've been doing.
What seems to me much more likely is that we've been looking
at some type of a blip in the rather moderate upturn that we've had
for eight quarters now. I noticed that of the eight quarters we've
had in succession that have been basically positive, four have been
lower than the previous quarter, which is rather interesting. So, it
seems likely that we're looking at a blip. And the question is what's
going to happen after that blip.

5/18/93

-29-

The first question, obviously, is:
When is the blip going to
be over?
It may last a little longer; it may still be going on. But
is the Greenbook basically correct? Are we looking at an extended
period of slow or sluggish growth?
Is it going to be somewhat
stronger than that, maybe a good deal stronger than that?
Each of
these [scenarios], it seems to me, takes us in a different direction.
But regardless of which one begins to emerge, there doesn't seem to be
any compelling impetus in real economic activity that we can see [as
cause] for concern right this minute.
I think there will be time to
have this very murky situation begin to [clarify].
In the area of inflation there may be three possible
scenarios working here. The first one--which I think all of us hope
is the case and which has a fair probability in my mind--would be that
the things we've been seeing the last several months are indeed
aberrations and that the disinflationary process that we've had is
still more or less in place. I hope that's the case. It seems
unlikely to me that we're in an incipient rising new [inflation]
trend, that the game is over and [inflation is] on the way back up.
Now, we've been talking about that all morning. And a number of
possible explanations that would lead one in that direction are out
there. That may turn out to be what is happening, but it's very
difficult for me to see how that can be, given the fundamentals of the
slack in the economy. In my mind the highest probability would be
that we're looking at some rough bottoming out process in here, and
that may be the toughest of all to deal with. If we are looking at a
rough bottoming out process with the kind of economy that we have now,
it would really be disappointing to still have 3-1/2 percent or so on
the CPI.
And what should be done about it? When we think about what
should be done about that, if that's the case, we have to have a
context or a view of what is happening in the real economy. If we're
going to have an economy that will start to accelerate soon and
strongly, then it's fairly clear what we'll need to do as soon as that
becomes apparent. If the first quarter is the start of a new decline,
then we have some very fundamental economic problems that I'm not sure
I understand, and maybe nobody understands. What in the world would
be going on that would lead us to this kind of configuration?
If we
have the Greenbook's economy, continuing sluggish growth, that gives
us a nice philosophical policy question to answer. Do we try to
restrain this kind of economy in order to push inflation lower?
If we
did, would it work?
Or as you suggest, Mr. Chairman, are we perhaps
looking at some other kinds of problems that appropriately would
It seems to me that this is the type of
require some other answers.
question that we're going to need to address in the next part of the
meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. As things started to thaw out in my part of the
country after our last meeting, it seemed like a good time to do a
great deal of traveling throughout the District in large and small
communities to hear what people had to say. I found it an
increasingly depressing experience as the weeks wore on. Had I just
stayed at home I could have given you a much better report because the
numbers really are not bad. But the mood is totally sour.
Our agricultural sector is in good shape. Planting got off
to a slow start, but it did dry out and by the beginning of May

5/18/93

-30-

[farmers] were closing the gap on getting the planting accomplished.
As of last week they said they were very close to finishing their
seasonal planting. Farm equipment sales--implements of all types--are
the strongest in years but that doesn't seem to be driven as much by
confidence as by fear [that induces people] to go ahead and get it
done. Land prices are up sharply, 10 to 20 percent for agriculture.
There is talk of prices up to $1900 an acre, which cannot be sustained
by current [crop] prices.
Manufacturing is in good shape if one looks at the numbers;
new orders and backlogs are quite good. The metals are strong; auto
parts suppliers are in good shape and are taking market share away
from imports, especially by selling to the transplant firms but also
to the domestic producers.
Capital goods also are strong both on
domestic sales and [exports]; they feel they are able to take market
share back from where they dropped before. A telecommunications
equipment firm also reports very good sales, with good export sales to
Latin America in particular. Coal production is down 13 percent in
the first quarter but [our contacts] don't know whether that was
I spent some time touring these coalweather-related or not.
producing areas and mostly they're in a shrinking mode; their strategy
is a gradual longer-term exit, with a decline in capacity that is
planned.
Employment wasn't too bad in the District, but there is no
sentiment to increase employment.
The areas where we had been getting
some increases, especially health care, are totally frozen. Staff
levels are "replacement only" in major communities for health care.
One large hospital group said that it had cancelled all openings for
doctors and has no plans to fill the openings it previously had
listed.
Nothing is going on in commercial construction in the
District, but in industrial construction there is replacement of
capacity. No expansion is planned, but [firms] will build where they
need a facility to replace something that is obsolete. The
residential sector is pretty strong, both in sales and in
construction.
When I starting hearing about business loan demand picking up
at banks, that seemed to be an element of encouragement. But I was
quickly dissuaded from that by bankers who said:
"No, it's people
coming in whom we haven't seen in a long time saying that times are
going to get tough so they had better get friendly with their banker
and [arrange] lines of credit because they are going to need them
somewhere along the line."
On prices, the two types of firms that are able to get price
increases are those related to capital goods or motor vehicle
companies that are experiencing demand. But the others are those that
are shrinking [production]; they feel they're "right sizing" their
operations.
So, it's really a shift of supply and a shrinking of
their overall capacity. Some of that is defense or aerospace-related
and some is in electronics.
When I think about the national situation, I still cannot
persuade myself that we've entered a period of accelerating inflation
[and that] the erosion of the purchasing power of the dollar is

-31-

5/18/93

worsening.
[But] I don't know a single person outside this room who
agrees with [me on] that.
I've heard over and over again talk about
inflation, whether people relate it to the deficit or overall fiscal
policy or health care concerns. To me health care can raise costs and
redistribute [income], but I try to persuade people that it doesn't
mean a sustained erosion in purchasing power and money. And people
tend to snicker at me; I have zero credibility. My own daughter was
telling me why she was buying a town house at a fixed-rate mortgage in
southern California and I was trying to explain some things about
southern California's economy. She said I was being totally naive.
I
explained that I'm a central banker and it's important that I talk
about price stability and controlling inflation. She said it was time
I had a reality check!
[Laughter]
She said:
"Why do you think
inflation is not going up? You're just wrong."
And I found this same
sentiment among bankers and people in small and large businesses.
They have persuaded themselves that inflation is going up and there's
not anything anybody can do about it.
So, even though I felt relieved
by the March numbers coming in much better than those for January and
February and I thought we were okay--and I still have some
reservations about how reliable the April numbers are--I don't think
that's the issue. The issue is not whether we really have inflation;
I think we have inflation psychology. We have people acting on the
belief that future inflation will be higher. That's what we have to
address no matter what the statistics show.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Jerry, your comments are very much along the
lines of my thinking. I learned to fly an airplane very early in my
life; I had a father who was my flight instructor who taught himself
back in 1931.
He spent his life teaching me that the best way to be a
general aviation pilot is to find out what mistakes people make. And
even though I don't fly very much, I do read very regularly about
airplane accidents to find out what mistakes pilots make. And it's
interesting to me that the major mistake that amateur pilots make is
that they get in bad weather and they don't feel the gauges are right.
Somehow or other they think the gauges are wrong. It feels as if the
airplane is doing this and the gauges tell them the airplane is doing
something else. We're at the place, in the murky weather, where the
old monetary aggregates don't give us much help. In this environment,
we have to look at the gauges; we have to look at the instruments.
And the instruments tell us that inflation is rising. Clearly,
inflation is not going to go down to the 2-1/2 to 2 percent level that
I thought was doable as recently as one year ago.
I think the
Chairman is correct when he says that it's not a question of money or
credit that explains this phenomenon. Clearly, as others have said,
it is an attitude question. Now, in December I made some comments
about a 200 basis point increase in the fed funds rate and, Mr.
Chairman, you [went further] when you said that 300 or 400 basis
points really wouldn't work to change the attitudes. Well, I guess I
don't quite agree with that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I didn't say it wouldn't change the
attitudes; I said it wouldn't change the-MR. ANGELL.

The result.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

--the result.

5/18/93

I don't think
MR. ANGELL.
Here's what I think would happen.
we should increase interest rates by 300 basis points but, if we did,
I'm quite certain the price of gold would immediately begin a [sharp],
quick [drop].
It would happen so fast you'd just have to go and watch
it on the screen. If we made a 100 basis point increase in the fed
funds rate, the price of gold surely would turn back down unless the
situation is worse than I anticipate.
If we made a 50 basis point
increase in the fed funds rate, I don't know what would happen to the
price of gold but I'd sure like to find out!
[Laughter]
Now, I want
to remind you that monetary policy cannot do anything about growth
except harm it. Monetary policy can't fix growth; monetary policy can
only harm growth; monetary policy can only cause growth to be worse.
I agree that there are some attitude problems out there and some
significantly held belief by the American people and foreigners that
the U.S. government budget deficit is out of control.
And they
believe that because it's out of control the Federal Reserve will not
be able to stand firm. They believe that we'll have to give in and
that we will have to inflate our way out of this problem. Now, I
don't believe that. But the American people do believe that,
including, I think, your daughter, Jerry. Maybe she doesn't even
understand that; she just knows that inflation is going up.
We cannot make growth better in the period immediately ahead.
We just can't do that. Now, when I look at the first-quarter numbers
in the Greenbook, nominal GDP was 5.2 percent. Mike tells us that if
the trade numbers come in [as projected], if real GDP goes up, then
nominal GDP may go up also. Now, we only had two quarters of the
eight in the current expansion when that 5.2 percent was exceeded; one
was 6.2 percent and one was 7.1 percent. Of the eight quarters, the
5.2 percent is [the third highest] and everybody is sitting around
wringing their hands about what kind of growth we're [experiencing].
Pardon me, but every time I look at GDP quarterly data I see
variations quarter to quarter. I don't know what is going to happen
right now, but monetary policy can't fix it. Monetary policy can harm
it.
Monetary policy is about credibility; inflation is about
credibility. Now, if the American people believe that we are not
going to act, then this phenomenon of inflation attitudes we have will
get worse; if attitudes get worse, that means the tradeoff gets worse.
We can fix the attitudes about the Federal Reserve very quickly. And
if we fix those attitudes, we will gain stature for our institution
and our political system. Our democracy respects proper
decisionmaking. If we do what we need to do, [inflation] attitudes
will improve.
At the last meeting I was very concerned about what commodity
prices were doing. And as you know, they got lucky again and told us
that the rate of inflation was higher than we thought it was. Now, I
know there's nothing to it but they did get lucky. I've had plenty of
econometric studies tell me how lucky commodity prices can get. I
told you at the time that the reason I had not been upset before the
March FOMC meeting was that the price of gold was well behaved. But I
said that the price of gold was moving. The price of gold at that
time had moved up from 328 to 344, and I don't know what I was so
excited about! I guess it was that I thought the price of gold was
going on up. Now, if the price of gold goes up, long bond rates will
not be involved. People can talk about gold's price being due to what
the Chinese are buying; that's the silliest nonsense that ever was.
The price of gold is largely determined by what people who do not have

5/18/93

-33-

trust in fiat money system want to use for an escape out of any
currency, and they want to gain security through owning gold. Now, if
annual gold production and consumption amount to 2 percent of the
world's stock, a change of 10 percent in the amount produced or
consumed is not going to change the price very much. But attitudes
about inflation will change it.
The longer we go with this situation, the more we'll have to
increase rates and the higher long-term rates will go. The sooner we
move, then the sooner we [will remove] the uncertainty in intermediate
and long rates that comes with an increase in short rates. I hope
Bill McDonough is correct that a rise in short-term rates will mean
that the 10-year rate will fall. Whether that's the case or not to me
is a little uncertain, as I think it was to you. That is, I don't
know whether people will say:
"Oh my goodness, the Fed is worried
about inflation."
If the market's reaction to the first move is that
the Fed is worried about inflation, then in that environment I would
expect long bond prices to improve. But every 25 basis points we give
away on long bond yields--and we've already given 25 away by not
acting when we should have acted--is lost. When we act, when we let
the American people and the capital markets around the world know that
we care about price level stability--that's our mission--then we will
be well ahead and we will return to falling intermediate- and longterm interest rates, which will help get growth higher. A monetary
policy step at this time is a win/win.
I don't know what is going to
happen for sure. I hope Mike is correct that the rate of inflation
will move back down to 2.6 percent for the remaining 8 months of this
calendar year. If we make a move and Mike is correct, we could take
credit for having accomplished this and the price of gold will soon be
down to the 328 level and we can lower the fed funds rate at that
point in time and declare victory. But if what some of us suspect is
true--that the Greenbook is a little optimistic on inflation--then it
I don't feel
seems to me essential that we take a [firming] step.
[Laughter]
very strongly about it!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. Clearly, I haven't mastered the
timing of when to get my name on the list, having to follow such an
impassioned statement. As I listen to the discussion around the
table, I'm always struck, but even more so this time, by the vast
regional differences and perceptions. These people are trying to
bring some anecdotal evidence that gives us some clues on where we're
going as opposed to complete reliance on the statistics. So I'm
particularly struck this time by the differences regionally.
My own read on the national situation is that I think we're
more than likely returning to a slower, but I do believe sustainable,
growth path. And I don't think that this is necessarily bad.
Certainly, there are some areas of strength, and Mike pointed out a
number of them. But it does represent a continuation of this
operating restructuring that we're going through--the defense
restructuring and the balance sheet adjustments.
I don't think it's
very clear how long this process is going to take. Six months ago or
eight months ago we were trying to make projections as to how far
along it was.
[Now] I think it's pretty clear that we probably can't
make those kinds of assessments.
People and businesses are trying to
adjust to a new order of technology and more complete world

5/18/93

-34-

integration.
In fact, I think the whole inflationary/stable price
argument is clearly becoming a central part of day-to-day business
decisions.
There is the uncertainty that's associated with the
Clinton economic program. If you think about it, this Administration
has been in office only four months but we've been on an amazing
roller coaster with different thrusts. Some of [the ideas] clearly
were trial balloons, but some of them were certainly put forward with
great fervor as proposed bills. We are still not sure where all of
this is going to end up. Nevertheless, all of these arguments do
appear to be leading us to more inflationary pressures.
So, no matter
how it comes out--even though we didn't get the stimulus bill and I
think some folks might question whether it was really a stimulus
proposal--it is still leading to increased inflationary pressures.
I know I have talked about this in the past but I continue to
think--and I'll echo some of Si's comments--that the labor markets
remain a key to the economic environment. The economy is growing
enough to produce some jobs but hardly enough, really, to accommodate
even the population growth. I think the unemployment rate does mask
some of the adjustments and the turmoil that is occurring in the labor
markets on account of the downsizing, the de-layering, and the changes
in employment needs on account of new technology. The huge fixed
costs that are associated with taking on new permanent employees are
clearly deterring many businesses from staffing up. I come back to
this whole labor market question continually because I think it's the
flip side of what is going to happen with spending and whether or not
consumers are going to be able to participate in the stimulation of
the economy. So, whether or not this is a setback or a blip, and
whether or not this is a long blip or a plateau, I think it's not that
unexplainable if we go back to this entire question of restructuring
that is occurring.
Let me turn to inflation. Like everybody else I'm having a
hard time reconciling the recent numbers with the economy. One
observation I would make is that we shouldn't necessarily assume or
expect a smooth route of progress on inflation any more than we should
necessarily expect a smooth route on a recovery. Some bumps and
plateaus are likely. We should expect some experimentation in prices
as folks attempt to see if they can get price increases to stick.
We've seen lumber prices shoot way up but we've also seen them come
back down again. In looking at cattle prices, for example, we've seen
very strong prices, and they've finally been reflected in some of the
We saw strong
meat numbers in the CPI. Tobacco is another example:
[price] increases--that was what was driving the CPI--but now we hear
that we're going to have some cuts.
I agree with Jerry's argument on
inflation psychology.
I think we had inflation for so long that
people in demanding wage increases confuse growth with inflation. It
used to be that a 6 percent salary increase was nothing. But now that
would be fairly large. So, I think it's going to take a long time to
work through this entire process.
I don't think we should lose sight
of some of the countervailing pressures on prices:
international
competition; weak economies, certainly domestically but also
internationally; quality improvements; improved productivity; and weak
credit conditions. All of these things may well start to be reflected
in prices, so we will see this movement that's a bit up and down.
Having said all of that, the most recent CPI and PPI numbers and some
of the commodity price increases are clearly disturbing. But we have
to recognize that we have considerable difficulty interpreting these

5/18/93

-35-

numbers, even the ones that are historical, much less trying to
address some of the future ones.
So, I certainly agree with the
Chairman that this is an area that we have to address our attention
to.
It makes the policy questions that we're going to be facing in
the next round even more challenging.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. With respect to the real economy, my sense
continues to be that we're on a path of moderate growth.
I don't
really see a change in outlook with the mean between 2-1/2 and 3-1/2
percent, but with individual quarters ranging from perhaps a bit below
2 to a bit above 4 percent. The first quarter is pretty well
explained, it seems to me, by the weather and the pullback from the
surge in consumption. We had a similar phenomenon last year. As for
the employment situation, I know there is a lot of negativism around
it; but unemployment has come down from the peak last summer of 7.7
percent to 7 percent. And even California's unemployment rate this
last time came down to 8.6 percent; it had been up around 10 percent.
When I look at the monthly payroll numbers, I find it difficult to get
too depressed. The monthly average payroll growth in the third
quarter [of last year] was 25,000; it was 85,000 in the fourth
quarter, 147,000 in the first quarter of '93, and it eased off to
119,000 in April. The overtime is at record levels and the employment
gains are running at more than double what they were in the second
half of last year. So, I think this bodes well for durability and
sustainability. Auto sales seem to be holding up; the housing starts
numbers were good this morning; there may be an inventory adjustment.
Confidence certainly has fallen back from the euphoria of late last
year but it has stabilized at levels well above where it was, say, in
It's hard
October.
So, I guess people are buying housing and cars.
to become too convinced that we're headed for another serious swoon.
On the inflation watch, to paraphrase an old Ronald Reagan TV ad, last
time the question was:
Is there a bear in the woods? As far as I'm
concerned the inflation bear has been sighted--not by our staff I
might add!
[Laughter]
I think they should not be allowed near the
woods; I fear for their health.
Well, it's a curious phenomenon we've been going through the
past [several months].
Perhaps it's a blip; it's a very long blip if
it is a blip. Now, I suppose there are many hypotheses. I won't bore
you with my own personal list.
It's not especially useful to have
arguments saying this [upturn in inflation] can't happen with this set
of economic fundamentals because that's pretty articulately rebutted
by the fact that it has happened and has persisted for a number of
months.
I feel pretty much the same way about the notion that
basically the economy has to slow down for inflation to slow down.
It
has been slow and we've had rising inflation. I suspect inflation is
driven mostly by expectations.
That's one of the reasons there's not
so much talk about it; it's roughly what people expect.
I do think we can affect inflationary expectations, at least
in the market. Since I think we have 4 percent inflation, I now see a
couple of issues. The first is whether a 3 percent federal funds rate
is appropriate in this environment. And, secondly, are we satisfied
with 4 percent inflation? To focus on the first question, the more
immediate question, I think no one is proposing instituting a
restrictive policy to actually try to get on top of inflation in the

5/18/93

-36-

The only question that I can see is
sense of positive real rates.
whether one might partially adjust the nominal rate to reflect the
reality of higher inflation, leaving real short rates still lower than
those prevailing last year. But at some stage we're going to have to
think about whether 4 percent inflation is something we want.
I thought in the latter part of last year that there was some
chance that if inflation continued to decelerate we could hold a 3
percent federal funds rate--that that would be sustainable. The
perception was that inflation was 3 percent and falling. Now I have
very serious doubts as to whether a 3 percent federal funds rate is
sustainable. It seems out of line; it seems to violate some basic
tenets of common sense. The last time we had a 3 percent federal
funds rate was in 1963.
This is not a 1963 inflation environment.
When one looks around the world today, the only other 3 percent short
rates observed in captivity are found in Japan. And their economic
environment in terms of fundamentals is clearly as sluggish as ours,
if not more so.
But we are not in a Japanese inflation environment.
Their inflation is on the order of 2 percentage points below ours.
Obviously, we had a lot of opportunity to choose a federal funds rate
1 percent below the inflation rate last year and chose not to do it.
I would suggest that the result of the negative real short rates in
the 1970s was not pleasant. So, I rather doubt that anyone
parachuting into this economic environment would choose a 3 percent
federal funds rate. Now, perhaps real short rates don't matter, at
least in a weak economy. We certainly instruct the weak economies of
eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union that the one thing they
have to do is to get that nominal rate at about, or a little above,
the inflation rate. We certainly felt that significantly positive
real rates made a lot of sense in late 1990 and early 1991 [even] with
negative real GDP growth because of concerns about price stability.
However, without the aggregates to guide us, I think it's also a
pretty visible and simple measure which people may focus on. I wish
we had the aggregates to guide us; we don't know what is happening to
the hypothetical, shadow M2.
I suspect it may be growing pretty
rapidly, given the volume of funds going into the stock market.
It is
true, clearly true, that we don't understand the transmission
mechanism well. But I don't believe the lack of thorough
understanding should lead us to ignore what seems apparent to me:
So,
namely, that 3 percent short rates seem quite a bit out of line.
I don't have a lot of doubt that we're going to feel that the 3
percent needs changing. The question is one of timing, and my
argument is for sooner rather than later.
The concern is that as people start to look at the recent
inflation performance, it stands in direct contradiction to our
publicly stated objectives. It also stands in visible contrast to the
FOMC's inflation forecast of 2-1/2 to 3 percent issued only a few
short months ago in February. If we stand by while measured inflation
shreds our publicly stated convictions and forecasts, the concern I
have is that the long rate will continue to rise. As Governor Angell
mentioned, we've already lost 25 basis points. As inflation concerns
fester, I think long rates will move on up. And in my view perhaps
the market needs a signal that we're not going to allow this to get
out of hand, that we actually do care about inflation and that this
caring goes a bit beyond just the rhetoric. We lagged the market on
the way down and I thought that conserved credibility. But in the
opposite direction if we wait until we're dragged up by the market, I

5/18/93

-37-

think that will extinguish credibility. A measured response could
limit the damage on the long end of the market.
To me this is
important not just for long-term concerns but for near-term growth as
well. The only component of the current environment that is
stimulative or conducive to growth is the capital market environment
and in particular the long bond rate. My concern is that, with rising
inflation unchallenged by the Fed, the long end could deteriorate
quite rapidly. Ultimately, it's not up to us whether we tighten or
not. The markets are going to tighten on the long end as people focus
on the inflation and start thinking about it.
And that's going to
have whatever impact on the economy higher long rates will produce.
We can't do anything about that. What we can do, and about the only
thing we can do, is to try to limit the deterioration in the long end
by indicating that we're on the job. I think the long rate would
likely move up a bit if we made a measured move. But if credibility
matters at all, somehow at the end of the day when all the dust
settles the capital market environment and growth prospects should be
better compared to a situation with Fed inaction.
So, I think a lot is at stake:
not only the credibility [of]
long-term success but the capital market environment [of] near-term
success. The risk of waiting too long is that market participants
will start to focus more and more closely on inflation. They will
look back not just to the beginning of the year but to the fourth
quarter as well. They will look at our forecasts and our statements,
and the market will start to price in concerns and hypotheses about
Fed inaction. And I believe this could do serious damage not only to
credibility but to long rates, [including] mortgage rates, and to the
near-term outlook.
To summarize, I do see a changed environment. There is no
compelling evidence of any change in the outlook for growth; I think
we're still sort of in the middle there. We have a very different
inflation environment than the one we thought we were in, one in which
inflation has been running much higher. And the question is:
Does
the same federal funds rate of 3 percent make sense with no material
change in the outlook for growth, which is the way I see it, and an
environment of much higher inflation? It seems to me that if it made
sense in the old environment, it doesn't make sense in the new one.
And my preference would be to face up to this sooner rather than wait
until the market takes it out of our hands.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'll try to do this in three
sentences.
First, my instincts about the real economy have not
changed much; Governor Mullins was on the mark there. But as I've
said at several meetings running, I still do not have any great
conviction about the future in terms of the real economy. I still
think it could be stronger, but it could be weaker; I just don't have
that conviction. I want to second very strongly the comment you made
at the outset of the meeting, Mr. Chairman, about the situation in
Europe. I was not, as you know, at that last Basle meeting, but the
string of visitors who passed through after the Interim Committee
meeting, both on the official side and the private side, were gloomy
across the board. I mean really gloomy. The third point is that I
don't understand this inflation situation any better than anybody else
does. I think we cannot dismiss it as simply broccoli prices and

-38-

5/18/93

other wholly transitory things. On the other hand, I do
that economic fundamentals matter. And while I probably
hopeful as Mike Prell, I don't think I'm quite as gloomy
others appear to be in terms of where we are going. But
it is a changed situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
or not, but it's out there.

still think
am not as
as some
I agree that

I don't know whether the coffee is cold

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. D. LINDSEY.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

David.

Thank you, David.

[Statement--see

Questions?

What's been happening to M2 plus flows to

funds?
MR. D. LINDSEY. We have attempted to construct an M2 plus
mutual funds. We've tried to define the bond and stock mutual fund
component of that aggregate as consistent with M2 by pulling out the
IRA/Keogh components of bond and stock funds and also institutional
holdings, which unfortunately are reported to us only once a year.
We, therefore, have had to interpolate. The most recent data we have
for this measure are through March. They show that whereas M2 has
fallen since December, M2 plus mutual funds was about flat in January
and February before jumping up to a 6.7 percent rate of growth in
March. As you may remember, M2 growth for all of last year was 1.8
percent and growth of this broader measure was about 4-1/2 percent or
so.
MR. MULLINS.

Thank you.

MR. PARRY. In alternative C you state that you think the
impact of higher rates would cause the prime rate to go up by 1/2
percentage point. How strong are your convictions in light of this
historically large spread between the cost of funds and the prime and
also the very weak demand for bank credit?
MR. D. LINDSEY. Well, they are not absolute but our guess
was that banks would tend more or less as a knee-jerk reaction to
maintain the spread, given the opportunity. Presumably, at some point
those spreads would come down but I'm not sure it would be tomorrow if
the FOMC decides to move up the funds rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?
If not, let me
start off.
Frankly, I found this a really interesting meeting in the
sense that there is a new view about what is going on out there which
I found quite intriguing. In fact, I think it explains part of what
the big problem is.
It's interesting to go around the table,
especially hearing the presidents, and to get the sense of this
political pessimism which seems to have emerged. It's a relatively
recent phenomenon. It's the type of thing that we, of course, have
been exposed to inside the Beltway to some considerable extent.
The
Washington Post has been publishing all this to a large extent. There

5/18/93

-39-

is some evidence in the political polls, which show a deterioration in
the view about where the country is going, etc. What is new is that I
haven't heard this in the business community at the level that I've
been hearing it around here. What this suggests to me is a possible
explanation of what, indeed, is going on in the inflation area.
As I indicated earlier, I don't think one can look toward the
fundamentals for an explanation. One of those fundamentals is
protectionism; but even though it is a key factor, it cannot be
contributing a large-size impact on inflation at this stage.
I think
the effects of regulatory changes are real, but again we're talking a
It strikes me that what we are
minimal effect of .1 or .2 percent.
dealing with here are very strong and in a certain sense accelerating
psychological expectations--pessimism or concern about whether this
country has the capability of politically solving the problems which
the markets have been terribly concerned about. The deficit has been
hanging out there for a long while and it is only very recently that
[unintelligible] the current services deficit starts to turn up in the
long run. In effect we've seen in recent years an extraordinary tilt
in the yield curve, which is very suggestive of that. The long-term
view is one which is scarcely positive.
Now, if you superimpose a deep-seated pessimism on the
outlook and if you argue that the transmission mechanisms that we're
all used to are fundamentally psychological, then the reason why slack
labor markets affect wages is essentially that people react in a
certain way; they [assess] their prospects and they bid in the markets
accordingly, and those markets work. And it's true, as I indicated
before, in the price area as well.
So, the major issue in examining
inflation is not to start where we usually do in trying to look at
slack markets and money and credit and to watch the transmission
affect the price level. It's really important for us to recognize in
looking at prices--assuming that prices are correctly calibrated, and
there are problems, so obviously that is a question--that the price
levels and the wage levels tell us what people are doing. And then
it's up to us to figure out why they're doing it. That they are doing
it is without question. The question that we've really got to
confront is:
What is the mechanism? I must say, having looked at all
of the data and having done all the contemplating that I could, I
cannot believe that anything other than inflation expectations is
embodied in here. Clearly, actual inflation can run up wholly
independently of the real world for a while; ultimately, the real
world will cave in. The problem, however, is that before the real
world works, the very fact of the price movements themselves has real
world effects.
So, we're dealing here with a very interesting problem
in which the underlying inflationary expectations can have real world
effects. We cannot view this type of outlook by stipulating that
there are fundamentals and then there is the psychology, because
that's not what happens. What happens is that when interactions
begin, they basically change the fundamentals.
Now, I don't know whether or not this [increase in] inflation
is a bubble or a blip as some of you said. I don't know whether it's
deep-seated and irreversible. It may well be that the President will
get his budget passed very quickly and this whole [issue] will
dissipate. That's the expectation on the Hill.
I frankly don't know
whether it's true or false.
I do know that great certainty at this
particular stage about what any of these variables is doing is

5/18/93

-40-

probably ill advised. What we have to deal with here is something
that I would suspect we have to watch very closely. I think Governor
Mullins is right that a 3 percent funds rate is too low. I think
we've known that for quite a long while; the issue has never been
that. The issue is:
When do we move?
I would suggest that while
there is a remote possibility that we may not want to move at some
point in the future, it has to be pretty remote.
My inclination for today--and I'm frankly most curious to get
other people's views--would be to go to a tilt toward tightness and to
watch the psychology as best we can.
By the latter I mean to watch
what is happening to the bond market, the exchange markets, and the
price of gold, and try to sense whether inflation is accelerating or
dissipating. It is perfectly credible, having lived through these
types of things many times in the past, that this [upturn in
inflation] can suddenly begin to deflate. It has happened innumerable
times in the past. I know that both Governors Angell and Mullins have
argued that there is a 25 basis point ratchet in the long bond. I
respectfully submit that you know, more than anybody, that if you
really seriously believe that that is a ratchet, it can go either way.
I must say I agree fundamentally with the philosophy that both of you
are raising and the only point I would raise is the rachet issue.
MR. MULLINS.
this, necessarily.

It has gone up 25 basis but not entirely due to

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the point I'm trying to get at.
In any event, my initial inclination--and frankly this is a very tough
issue and one that has all of us sort of swimming around--would be to
have a tilted directive and to keep a very close eye on the situation
and see day by day what is happening. If this [inflationary
expectations sentiment] simmers down in the marketplace, then I think
the next sign post is what actually happens to the price indexes
because that clearly will have a significant psychological effect.
I
also think this is one of the rare times when we ought to have more
frequent telephone conferences as events evolve. And rather than take
any action today, which I don't think would be desirable for a number
of reasons, I would very much like as a starting point to go to an
asymmetrical directive and then just watch developments and perhaps
have one or more telephone conferences until we get a better feel on
this. We are in an unstable environment and I think it can go either
way. That would be my recommendation.
I have one other issue I'd like to throw on the table. I
hesitate to do it, but let me tell you some of the issues that are
involved here. If we are dealing with psychology, then the
I was raising the
thermometers one uses to measure it have an effect.
question on the side with Governor Mullins of what would happen if the
Treasury sold a little gold in this market. There's an interesting
question here because if the gold price broke in that context, the
thermometer would not be just a measuring tool.
It would basically
affect the underlying psychology. Now, we don't have the legal right
to sell gold but I'm just frankly curious about what people's views
are on situations of this nature because something unusual is involved
in policy here. We're not just going through the standard policy
where the money supply is expanding, the economy is expanding, and the
Fed tightens. This is a wholly different thing. Anyway, I'm most

5/18/93

-41-

curious to get your views in these various respects, so please don't
be afraid to throw things out on the table.
MR. LINDSEY.

Just a question.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, last time you argued very
eloquently against an asymmetric directive because of the costs
involved. I was wondering what has [changed].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Costs?

MR. LINDSEY. Well, I can't say it as well as you did last
time, but the case against an asymmetric directive last time was that
there are fixed costs in our putting out [such a] directive. And in
fact you persuaded me actually to dissent. So it's relevant.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm not sure I referred to

"fixed"

costs.
MR. MULLINS. The argument was that it's better to move from
a symmetric directive, that there's nothing to be gained from-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, what I was arguing then--remember
the two-month moving average on inflation then was higher than it is
today and either it was going to come down dramatically or not--was
that it wasn't going to matter whether we moved from a symmetric
directive or from an asymmetric directive. My impression now is that
we are truly asymmetric and that we are looking at a process which is
different from the one that existed previously. I did not have a view
that what we were looking at was essentially a risk driven by
inflation expectations. In fact, I don't think I raised that issue;
my recollection eludes me. This is different. I think this relates
to a large extent to the political-psychological issues.
I thought
When he looks just at the data
Jerry Jordan [said] it best:
everything looks fine; when he goes out into the boondocks he sees
awful attitudes.
I don't know how many of you said it; I didn't write
it down, but there were five or six of you who said that. And it's
certainly very startling.
MR. ANGELL.
I'd like to ask
mentioned where we are, if the dollar
foreign exchange markets do you think
circumstance to surprise everyone and
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
raise rates.
MR. ANGELL.

you a question also. When you
were to weaken somewhat on
it would be appropriate in that
not sterilize the intervention?

Well, that's another way of saying just

I know, but it seems to me that the timing would

be--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we would confuse the market.
I
don't know how they would read that. It would take them a long while
to figure out what was going on. Supposing we intervened for $200
million and didn't sterilize; I don't know what it would do to the
funds rate.

-42-

5/18/93

MR. MCDONOUGH. I think people would be so busy trying to
I
figure out what we'd done that I doubt the funds rate would move.
think it would just enormously confuse people.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, that's frankly my impression.

MR. ANGELL. You think a $200 million change in reserves
would cause the fed funds rate to move definitely?
MR. MCDONOUGH.
repo of $3-1/2 billion.
MR. ANGELL.

Our intervention today was a two-day System

Yes.

MR. MCDONOUGH. The law of supply and demand doesn't get
changed at all by $200 million. So it would be only the signalling
effect, and the signalling effect would be to confuse.
MR. MULLINS.

We have to tell them what the fed funds rate

is!
MR. D. LINDSEY. The problem is that there are a lot of other
things going on.
If you held everything else equal and affected
borrowing by $200 million, that would have a big effect.
MR. ANGELL. But what I meant was that if we change a path by
$200 million, that's quite a few basis points, right?
MR. D. LINDSEY. Oh, my goodness!
[Laughter]
You're
approaching zero or near double-digits, I think, with that kind of
change. Maybe that's slightly exaggerated.
MR. ANGELL. What other meaning can you give to nonsterilized intervention than a change in the target?
MR. D. LINDSEY. Well, around current levels, [we estimate
that a change of] $25 million in the borrowing level will have a 50
basis point effect. So, you're talking almost 10 times that much.
MR. ANGELL. You could demonstrate the $25 million of foreign
exchange intervention-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's an interesting idea but
it's too complex. Why create uncertainty when what we're trying to do
is to eliminate it?
MR. JORDAN. May I ask a question that relates to that
uncertainty and trying to reduce it?
If an action that results in a
higher funds rate, which would be the first increase in I don't know
how many years-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is the longest period we've gone
since when without changing the funds rate?
MR. JORDAN.
[of last year].
MR. ANGELL.

Well, we haven't changed it since September 4th

We haven't raised it since February of

'89.

5/18/93

-43-

MR. JORDAN. So, if it's the result of an action by the
Committee after a full set of deliberations, I don't know that it
would raise many questions in the minds of people as to what happened.
[It would be clear] that this Committee looked at a whole lot of
things and in its collective wisdom decided to raise the funds rate.
But if it's done as a result of an asymmetric directive, which
involves discretion, then what it was that triggered the increase is
going to be very important.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. I would have no
intention of acting on that directive without full consultation of
this Committee because it's a very important move.
MR. SYRON.

So, would you have a vote?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That depends. The evidence may be
sufficiently startling that a vote may not be required. The answer to
the question is that I don't like to take votes on the telephone; I
don't think we've had many and I would prefer not to. But this is a
very unusual situation, and I'm not sure how I would [do it].
We
could have a vote in that event.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me important that the Chairman's
powers not be diminished to require a vote. I just don't think we
want to do that at all.
MR. BOEHNE. The purpose of an asymmetric directive is to
give the sense of the Committee to move in that direction. And if
we're going to meet frequently, then the notion of tilting it one way
or the other seems to me to lose some of its merit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think that's right.

If it's too important a decision to move without
MR. BOEHNE.
making sure you have the Committee's agreement, then you can decide it
then. We don't need to bias it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a very legitimate issue, and I
would be fully willing to agree to that because it does raise an
interesting question as to what the meaning of asymmetry is if we're
effectively going to go back into a meeting. The Desk can move from
symmetry as well as asymmetry. But it does raise the interesting
question as to what would be the appropriate vehicle.
I do not feel
strongly on this question and I would yield to whatever the Committee
would be interested in doing.
MR. KEEHN. Just to add to Ed's point:
If we think the
inflation issue is expectations as opposed to real, it seems to me
that an asymmetric directive, which no one will be aware of for
another six to eight weeks, isn't going to do anything for us. An
asymmetric directive that won't be known for eight weeks isn't going
to do anything with regard to the expectations issue.
If in fact the
inflation increases are sustained, then it seems to me we ought to
move in a way that will deal with those issues, and that ought to
follow a phone call.
Therefore, I think the asymmetry confuses the
My thought is to leave the directive
issue and doesn't deal with it.
as is but be very specific that we will have a phone call.

5/18/93

-44-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a very thoughtful note.
That's
the other side of this argument, and I think it's important to put
that on the table.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, what would be the trigger point
for the consultation? Are you going to be waiting for the next PPI
and CPI?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, not necessarily. It would be a
judgment that something is deteriorating and the Committee must
address it.
If this simmers down, and I think there's a reasonably
good chance it may do exactly that, then we can remain tranquil until,
If that is tranquil, then we can
say, the next PPI/CPI comes out.
afford to stay where we are, as far as I'm concerned.
MR. ANGELL.
I think the Committee should remember that the
reason for having [an asymmetric] directive is that sometimes the
deliberation/decisionmaking process is facilitated by having the
Chairman be free to make the moves that need to be made based upon
what the Committee has said. I guess I thought that's what you were
after.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it to you this way. My
preference is to have an asymmetric directive on the grounds that, as
I listen to the Committee, that's my inference as to what the
However, it's my inclination on a very serious issue
[consensus] is.
of this nature to consult with the Committee--because it's a very
important move if we move--and I think the Committee should be
satisfied that everyone has had his or her say in this regard. In
that context, I don't think it's going to look that bad whether there
is a symmetrical directive or not. The question basically is the
choice of the Committee as far as I'm concerned. Vice Chairman
Corrigan, you've been around here for a long time. What's your view?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me make a factual observation
and then a comment--not that we should let facts get in the way of
these things. On this inflation issue, the question, aside from the
diagnostics of what is causing it, is really:
Where are we?
It's
clear that achieving the further progress toward price stability that
But
everyone is hoping for in 1993 looks a bit remote at this point.
the other side of the question is that while we may not be doing as
well as we hoped, are we doing as badly as we think? Of that I'm not
so sure, so I think a little perspective here might be useful. Look
at the core CPI in the first and second quarters of the years 1990,
1991, 1992, and 1993.
In '90 it was 5.3 and 5.5 percent; in '91 it
was 6.5 and 3.8 percent; in '92 it was 4.2 and 3.3 percent; in '93 it
is 4.1 percent and--if you take the Greenbook [projection for the
second quarter], which I'm quite prepared to do--3.3 percent. Now,
that's not what we had hoped for. Again, Wayne or David made the
point that the number reported in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony as
the central tendency of the Committee was 2-1/2 to 3 percent or
something like that.
So, in that sense things aren't working out as
well as we had hoped. But at least to date I'm not yet quite
persuaded that the genie is out of the bottle. If you look at the
experience at least so far, while there's no question it's not what we
want it to be, I'm not so sure that I'm personally ready to concede
I don't think it is.
the point that all is lost.

-45-

5/18/93

Now, on the question of procedure:
First of all, under any
circumstance I have always believed that no matter what we do we've
always got to leave the Chairman with maneuvering room.
I don't care
whether the directive is asymmetric or symmetric; to me that's
irrelevant. There always has to be that powerful, powerful prejudice
that leaves the Chairman with flexibility when he needs it. Having
said that, and putting aside my own views about policy which will come
later, in my mind's eye one argument for an asymmetric directive that
I don't think has yet been mentioned--it has nothing to do with
process--is that if it turns out that things do start to look a little
better, we're going to look a lot better by virtue of having that
asymmetric directive on the record.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. When you say "look a little better,"
look a little better in what sense?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. If overall performance starts to
look better in terms of the economy, inflation, or both, and that
asymmetric directive is on the record, I think institutionally that
makes us look better. In other words the signal is still there that
we weren't insensitive to what was going on.
MR. MULLINS.

Yes, we noticed.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, we saw the bear in the woods;
he went back to hibernate but we saw the SOB. This seems to me to be
a win/win [situation] because if on the other hand it turns out that
things aren't so good--that the bear is out in the corn field or the
back yard--and we have an asymmetric directive that we've utilized,
we're better off as well.
So, putting aside all of these complicated
questions of process, I think those arguments should be part of the
picture. As a matter of fact, I think the substantive arguments are
more important in this setting than are the process arguments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the substantive issue here is a
crucial one, and how we want to handle it relates to the secondary
picture of the question. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS.
Thank you.

I had a question but it was answered earlier.

MR. MULLINS.
I was going to make the point that President
Corrigan made. I think an asymmetric directive captures at the
minimum where we should be. And I see no down side from it; we can
only look good. If things get better, it says at least that we were
concerned about [inflation] and were focused on it.
It also says the
same thing, as Jerry mentioned, if things get worse.
If we don't have
[an asymmetric directive], then I think it says that somehow we were
not attuned to or did not recognize the situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're raising an interesting point.
There's a timing question here. Let me just say for the sake of
argument that we move from a symmetrical directive three weeks from
now because of certain events that are occurring. If we do that, it
gives the impression that we are moving because 24 hours before
something happened whereas if we-MR. MULLINS.

It's event driven.

-46-

5/18/93

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It means that there is a process--

MR. MULLINS. And I think it's worse if inflation gets better
Shouldn't they at
because then, looking back, people will wonder:
least have been on watch? Again, I just see no down side. Last time
perhaps there was a down side in the sense of alerting people. I
don't think it affects process at all but instead will communicate,
though not for quite a while. But it will communicate the right
things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Actually, my view on this just changed 180
degrees based on what you said. My original view was that there was a
cost to going asymmetric and if the economy were to weaken and prices
were also behaving favorably, given the timing of Humphrey-Hawkins--.
But I'm persuaded by the point you just raised that if we have to act,
it's much better that it be seen that there was an extensive
discussion of this and not that a number came in out of the sky and
that we were acting just on that number. So, I changed my mind 180
degrees based on that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I guess I'm persuaded by the arguments for
asymmetry. It seems to me that if what we want to do is to deal with
inflationary expectations, then the most effective way to do it--in
terms of when we change the rate--is to do it by vote to show the full
Committee's participation in that decision.
I'd say it would be even
better at a meeting, either this one or the next one, but certainly by
telephone if not that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. I have to agree with what President Parry just
said. If what we have is psychology, we want to deal psychology a
death blow. I think that is [best] done at a meeting and I would
suggest now.
I think we have another problem. Governor Angell and I may
have more of a problem than anybody else; on Friday our dissents [at
the March FOMC meeting] will come out. And it will be obvious that
the Committee considered a move and rejected it again at this meeting.
So, I would again say that the best thing to do, if in fact what we
have is psychology at work, is to [vote for] an increase at this
meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. May I just ask a technical question in reference
to Jerry's point? I haven't had the feeling that the difference
between symmetry and asymmetry necessarily constrains your ability to
make a move. It seems to me that as the Chairman you ought to have
the ability to make a move under [changing] circumstances as you see
fit. Asymmetry means to me that we would go into the intermeeting
period [ahead] with a very strong bias toward making a change to
tighten, and I don't think the lack of asymmetry necessarily ought to

5/18/93

-47-

inhibit your ability to tighten if in fact the numbers
way that makes that seem the appropriate thing to do.

[develop]

in a

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me just say that I'm not sure
that whatever happens in the real world over the next period of time
is going to be significantly influencing our decision relative to
whether we were symmetrical or asymmetrical. Normally when we talk in
those terms we are talking about real economic variables and we are
looking at whether or not the economy is [weakening] or strengthening.
It happens in a gradual way. Remember that when we were asymmetric
toward ease for a long period of time it was because what we were
seeing was a gradually sagging economy. And we could anticipate how
we'd react. This is really quite different. This is almost a bubble.
It is either going to go burst and disappear or it's going to build
up. I don't visualize looking at that sort of process in the same
manner. I think how we stipulate our directive is probably irrelevant
to how we will want to behave.
So, as I said before, I don't consider
it a big deal one way or the other. And I don't think it will
significantly affect what this Committee does or how we do it.
I
think it's strictly a perception question of how we wish to be
recorded in this particular meeting and under what conditions. And
there are arguments on both sides of that.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Si, just to emphasize in case I
wasn't clear, I agree with you:
There's no question that with or
without asymmetry the Chairman always has a margin of flexibility. I
was trying to suggest that on the issue of whether to prefer symmetric
or asymmetric--not that they are the only possibilities but just
focusing on those two--the substantive [reason] for having an
asymmetric directive is that no matter what happens, if things get
worse or if things get better, the Committee is at that point on the
record as having been vigilant and alert.
MR. BOEHNE. The cost of an asymmetric directive, I think, is
not insignificant.
If, for example, this turns out to be an inflation
bubble--if it turns out not to be a problem and goes away--but the
real sector because of all the uncertainty about tax policy and so
forth turns out to be a good bit weaker than we [anticipate], we're
going to look pretty trigger happy. So I think there is a cost
involved. I don't know if it's going to come out that way but we have
a very uncertain environment. The situation can go either way both on
the inflation front and on the real growth front.
I think we need to
watch it very closely and we need to show that we have an open mind as
to which direction policy is going to go.
If circumstances warrant a
tighter policy, then let's tighten. I think deeds, not words, speak
to expectations.
I just don't see that asymmetry buys us very much.
There can be a plus to it, but there can be a negative to it. And I
don't think we need to take the chance. We're going to meet
frequently.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me state that we have another tool,
which we're not discussing, that can be used here--not as far as
policy is concerned because I think we've all concluded that policy
will be what it is--because we're talking now about the question of
perceptions. We haven't discussed the fact that we do have a policy
record--I beg your pardon, minutes. And we have the capability in
those minutes, depending on how they are stipulated, to characterize
what we are doing. And that should readily capture the particular

-48-

5/18/93

problems that we are all addressing here. So, in viewing this I think
we ought to try first to find a means by which to separate what policy
is and then to discuss the issue of how we wish to be perceived. If
we can make that distinction--and from what I can judge I think most
of us would be willing to do that--they should be handled separately.
President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. I had started off this year hoping that
inflation would be less than last year; but much more importantly I
believed that inflation this year was going to be less than last year.
It has already been mentioned that it would take [an inflation rate
of] 2.6 percent or something like that for the rest of the year [to
achieve the staff forecast for inflation].
But I had been thinking
more that 2-1/2 percent nominally should be a goal that was doable
this year for the whole year, which would have been an average of .2
for every month of the year. Now, if it averages .2 for the remaining
eight months, that still is going to hold inflation only at last
year's level, and I find that unacceptable. So, I think there is
already enough information, that nothing else needs to be learned, and
that an immediate action is warranted.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, we're obviously operating in a
very difficult environment and within parameters that may be quite
different.
I think I could make an argument for easing on the basis
of a decelerating economy just as I could for tightening in the light
of the recent inflation numbers.
Given the amount of pessimism that
is out there, given the employment situation and the high level of
unemployment--even though it has come down, 7 percent is not a
desirable number--a tightening action could well abort the expansion
or certainly cause greater deceleration in the economy. And I think
we have to be as attentive to that as to the inflation numbers. Now,
it may be that we will have to make a move to counter inflation but
before we do that I think we have to be very sure that inflation is
really on an upward trend. Inflationary expectations may be out
there, but I certainly haven't heard anybody in our area of the
country telling me that they're concerned about inflation. Maybe they
should be, but there isn't any concern about it.
I agree entirely
with Governor Angell that monetary policy can harm the economy. If we
were to make a premature move, we could harm the economy; and I think
we ought not to be doing that. Again, these inflation numbers may be
temporary. They may not be but they could be, and I think we have to
be very careful before we overreact to the inflation numbers.
So, I
would not be in favor of any move at this time and I agree with your
prescription in that regard.
On symmetric versus asymmetric, in light of my views on the
economy, I think we ought to have a symmetric directive. The down
side of having an asymmetric one is exactly as Ed Boehne described:
We could be viewed as overreacting to the inflation numbers if in fact
they get better. So, I hope if we have to take action that we do it
very, very deliberatively in light of real information about a trend
in the inflationary situation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

-49-

5/18/93

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, my inclination is to say that
although there is some pessimism, it is fiscal-related. My own bias
is that these inflation numbers are bothersome and that tightening
would be the better path if I were convinced that they were permanent.
At this point I am willing to wait and see a little longer. So, I
would leave [policy] the same. When we do act, though, I think it
should be by vote, so I would also say symmetric for now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Broaddus.

MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to support action
today. As far as I'm concerned, the issue is credibility.
I think
Governors Mullins and Angell made that point very eloquently. In
matters of credibility there is no substitute for action, so I think a
good move today would be to raise the funds rate 1/4 point. Yes,
there are risks, but it's possible to exaggerate those risks. The
funds rate now in real terms is negative. I think it's easy to
overstate the risk to the economy of a small increase [in the funds
rate].
The other point I would make is that if we wait until we're
absolutely certain and convinced that the inflation trend is upward-we've been down that road before--we may well have waited too long.
That would reduce our credibility and it might be quite costly to
regain it.
So, I would favor action today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Maybe I'm haunted too much by late 1986 and
early 1987.
At that time a lot of regions of our economy really were
pretty sick. You could put a football over the map of the United
States and put one end on Phoenix, Arizona and the other end on
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and lay that football out and the economy
would really [unintelligible].
Talk about pessimism and talk about
depression and talk about the fall in land values from $1700 an acre
to $900 an acre and in Iowa from $3100 down to $1400!
That pessimism
was strong.
It was hard to see then, but we knew what was there if we
looked at commodity prices and gold. And yet when we got ready to
act, we were so incapable of acting because events got in our way.
This speech is about events that may get in our road. One event was
the Louvre Agreement. When the Louvre Agreement [existed], it didn't
seem appropriate for us to make a move because in some sense that was
a part of what some of us thought was a deal. And then we got into
May of '87 and the dollar got strong; and I remember Paul Volcker
saying:
"Well, is this the day we want to increase rates?" And I
felt that the dollar was strong on that day, [so] maybe we didn't want
to do it then. We didn't do it; events got in the road and all of a
sudden we found ourselves with the wrong fed funds rate in the fall
when you came on Board, Mr. Chairman.
So, of course, I want to act
today. I want to raise the rate today. I'd be satisfied with 25
basis points.
That's crazy when I want 50, but I'm a compromising
I would recommend to you--in a sense I've taken
person.
[Laughter]
myself out of the decision--that you stay with the Chairman's
I think it's very
recommendation on an asymmetric directive.
important that you do that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. My preference would be for no change today but
with an asymmetric directive toward tightening. I think having that

5/18/93

-50-

on the record in the future
against us for reasons that
mentioned. For psychology,
to dump her bracelet on the
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

is more likely to be in our favor than
Jerry Corrigan and Governor Mullins
I think we ought to get Governor Phillips
gold market at some point!
Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. I'm marginally persuaded to go with asymmetric
toward tightening. But I must say that I'm rather astonished that Bob
Forrestal is the only one around this table who has even discussed the
possibility that tightening might have a very, very serious effect on
economic growth. That is what worries me. And the political reaction
to a dumped economic growth rate could have much more serious
inflationary implications and also serious implications for the future
of deficit reduction. So, I think we ought to be very, very careful
not to move until we're really persuaded that there are overwhelming
reasons to do so.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, my earlier comments were really
observations and questions. Just to be clear as to where I come out
on policy at this point:
It seems to me, as we went around the table
and talked about the economy, that the general thrust was that the
economy is okay but there was a theme that some moderation has taken
place in terms of growth since the last meeting. I didn't hear
anybody talk about a growth rate that to me would be high enough to
sustain this inflationary trend that we're worried about.
It does
seem to me that Ed Boehne makes a very compelling point on this.
In
light of all that, I'd be for alternative B with symmetric language.
But I would be prompt to take an action by telephone if something in
the future would warrant that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, just on the issue of policy itself,
it seems to me that credibility is a two-way street. It's important
to maintain credibility but I fully agree, as I think everyone does,
I would
that we are--using your words--in an unstable environment.
argue that psychology is poor not just on the price front; we heard a
lot of that. I think we're in a situation where a lot of our
institutions look very weak. And the Federal Reserve is one
institution that hasn't looked weak so far.
So, I'd be pretty
cautious about running off and doing anything that looks too much like
overreacting in one direction or another. And for that reason I would
strongly feel that now is not a time to do something. Also, on the
psychology front, [unintelligible] even on prices unfortunately the
markets would react with it.
I'm not sure Jerry Jordan's daughter
would react right away [in terms of] what she wants to pay for the
house if we raise the funds rate 25 basis points.
For a lot of people
we would have to wait until it affects their pocketbooks and they see
some impact from that.
On the question of symmetry, I think that's
issue. It depends an awful lot on whether we end up
which is at least a 50/50 chance. How would we want
ourselves in that case? Where is the lesser cost of
think it probably is to be asymmetric.

not an enormous
being wrong,
to present
being wrong?
I

5/18/93

-51-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, having heard the conversation here,
I think that's the real question. It's not what happens if we're
right, but how we want to appear if we're wrong. Since we are the
central bank, if we're going to be wrong, we should be wrong on the
side of preserving the currency. That's where I guess our bias should
be, provided we don't allow that to affect how we are going to-MR. SYRON. One small last point:
On the issue of
implementing policy--and several colleagues have said this--this is an
important enough point that I hope we would have a telephone
conversation. Everything else being the same, I would hope that
people could be recorded if this is seen as a critical problem.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I take that as a serious question
and I think it's going to depend to a very substantial extent on what
happens out there.
I hate to go out of a meeting with the degree of
uncertainty that we have. But the uncertainty is real; and we're not
going to change the level of uncertainty by making believe that it is
unreal. Let's face that. We happen to be meeting at this particular
date because that is what was on our calendar. If we were meeting on
a different date, we'd probably have a greater degree of certainty
about what is going on. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, we've been around this bush a
number of times now. I would support no change with an asymmetric
directive. The reason I like the asymmetric directive is that I think
it reflects the fact that this Committee is on top of the situation
and is concerned. That is the case and I think we should have an
asymmetric directive for that reason. That does not mean that I
necessarily think we're going to use it.
If we move to tighten now,
it seems to me the reason would be because we have the perception that
inflation has indeed already set in on us and has to be countered now,
or maybe it should have been countered sooner. The way to counter it
is to tighten money; and the reason we tighten money is to restrain
something. Well, if we had a strongly accelerating economy, it would
be clear that it needs to be restrained. We have something less than
that--the Greenbook economy or worse. What is it we want to restrain?
There are not any excesses that I can clearly find. It seems to me
that if we want to tighten, we've got to be very clear why. To simply
say "to counter inflation" really isn't enough.
If there's something
we want to restrain, let's decide we want to restrain it. If it is a
matter of restraining expectations, let's be very express about that
and be very careful that we take a good look at whatever secondary
effects--in the way of hard effects--we might set off in an attempt to
counter a psychological or soft effect in the area of expectations.
Now, that's not to say that we might not need to tighten at some
point; but I think we ought to be quite careful about tightening in
the face of a perception of an expectation-driven inflation without
some other harder evidence to go along with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN.
In these circumstances I think we need at a
minimum an asymmetric directive toward tightening. A lot of the
reasons for that have been covered and I won't belabor them. But I
would note that we have been shooting for further disinflation and
indeed, ultimately, for price stability. That is the long-run target
that we have committed to, appropriately, and we seem to be drifting

-52-

5/18/93

away from it.
I don't think it's fatal if the drift goes on a little
longer; and I admit that I don't know what the short run--the next
month or two of data--may bring. But it seems to me that we have to
be very careful at this point because we're not getting the result we
anticipated nor are we moving in the direction of our long-run
objective.
So, at a minimum I think we need the asymmetric directive
toward tightening.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. I agree with what Gary Stern said. I guess I'm
less concerned than Ed Boehne is about the notion that we might be
viewed as trigger happy. We haven't been close to a trigger in
months. This may be temporary, but seven months is a pretty long
temporary time as far as I'm concerned. It is true that we wouldn't
be restraining anything or countering anything if we moved because I
doubt that we would get ahead of inflation since it has already moved.
But at least we might be catching up in the sense of reflecting the
higher inflation in nominal rates. When we talk about moving a small
amount, we ought to be realistic about what sort of potential impact
it could have on the economy. I don't think there's anything sacred
about 3 percent rates. The yield curve has been upward sloping for
quite a long time now, since people have been expecting higher rates.
And the real short rate would still be negative and lower than it was
last year. So, I wouldn't be opposed to moving now. At least we
should be asymmetric. We ought to be clear on the risk of waiting too
long here, and that risk is that we will have to make precipitous
moves down the road. And if you want to think about the consequences
for the economy and the flak we're going to receive if we wait a bit
long, I think it's useful both for signalling and also for execution
that we be asymmetric now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS.
I would prefer symmetric. I still have
concerns about the weakness of the economy, so I think one can make
arguments in either direction. I will say that, having listened to
this discussion, I am persuaded that perhaps the perceptions of our
being [watchful]--or maybe getting out the signal that we really are
addressing inflation--might be helpful. So, I could live with
asymmetric toward tightening.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I didn't put my hand up, but I have to speak
anyway! I was very much influenced by this meeting. I came in
sitting on the fence, frankly. And based on hearing the discussion my
preference would be--if I had to do one or the other--probably to move
rates up a little right now. But it's clear to me that there's not a
consensus to do that. This is a very important move and I think there
has to be a stronger consensus than exists right now. Therefore, I
could accept deferring action.
I think there's a risk in deferral and
David put his finger on it. There's a risk that we might have to do
more later if things break the wrong way. In a sense, even if they
break the right way and we follow [developments] in this intermeeting
period, we may decide we really don't have to act. We can discuss it
again at the next meeting and maybe decide that we don't have to act
then either, but it won't remove the fact that the funds rate probably

-53-

5/18/93

is not pegged at a sustainable level. The question is:
What is that
[delay] building in, in terms of lagged effects that ultimately are
going to come home to roost later? And then there's the credibility
question that Al Broaddus raised in terms of where we all expected
inflation to come in this year and where it is likely to come in and
what that means if we take that sitting down. It's a tough issue, but
that's where I come out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm quite comfortable with "B"
asymmetric.
I might say, if I could just add a word on process which
I know you want to deal with separately, that if it turns out that the
Committee does come to a consensus that a tightening move is needed in
the foreseeable future, of course, I won't be a part of that decision.
But leaving that aside, if a tightening move is needed any time
between now and the next meeting, that will be one of the relative
handful of watershed policy decisions that come along. This is not a
"gimme putt."
Indeed, it's probably [a watershed decision] not just
because it would be a turning point but because of the environment in
which it is going to happen, if it happens.
So, I think there's a
great deal of wisdom in the suggestion that several people have made
that if you do that, you better do it right with a meeting of the
Committee by telephone or otherwise and by a vote.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm inclined to agree strongly with that
in the sense that we haven't moved interest rates up since 1989.
We
haven't moved at all in over six months. This Committee is going to
be highly visible. And no matter what it is we do over the next 3 to
6 or 9 to 12 months, it's going to be quite important for us to be as
close as we can to each other.
In other words, it's important since
there's no doubt from our various conversations that the underlying
philosophy of every member of this Committee falls within a relatively
narrow range in terms of what should be the economic and monetary
policy of this country. I think it would be very tragic if a group of
this extraordinary capability--as Bob Black used to say, this is the
best Committee he has seen in all the years he had been on the FOMC-were perceived to be in disarray. It's very important that we act as
a Committee and try to avoid, where we can, any evidences that this
Committee is in disarray or something of that sort. If it ever gets
to the point where this Committee is either in disarray or perceived
to be in disarray, there is no other institution in this government
And if my [assessment of] what in fact is
that can substitute for us.
causing the problems we are confronting is correct--that it's a deepseated psychological deterioration that continues--it is crucially
important that we stand tall as a group and try to find the means by
which we can merge our differences in a way in which the vast majority
of the Committee can support.
There have been occasions in the past
when I've raised the issue of "Let's try to vote together because it's
a crucial issue" but they were very few. I think I raised it a couple
of years ago; I may have raised it two or three times in the last
several years.
I don't think it's something that ought to be raised
often because one of the great strengths of this Committee is the
capability, which I think we exhibited today:
namely, that we have
interaction where a lot of minds are changed. I know my views changed
several times as this meeting evolved because of the evidence and the
strength of the arguments that came up. That's an extraordinarily
valuable facet of this Committee. If we at any time endeavored to

-54-

5/18/93

sort of force ourselves into a mold, we would lose that.
So, there
are two sides to this question. All I want to say is that Jerry
Corrigan won't forgive us if we don't get this right!
In any event, as I read this Committee as to where we stand
at this point, there is a significant majority who are willing to
support an asymmetric directive, using alternative B.
I think we are
in a position where before any action is taken--or indeed if any
evidence emerges that would even raise the question of whether we
should or should not act--we would want a telephone conference. My
best hope is that this whole psychological thing will dissipate, which
it could conceivably, that the next set of price data we end up with
are benevolent, and that we won't speak to each other for the next six
weeks! The chances of that are less than 50/50.
But leaving that
aside, are there any other issues that people would like to surface at
this time before I call for a vote?
MR. KEEHN.
by a phone call.

I think I hear that any change would be preceded

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Correct.

MR. ANGELL. But that would be more restriction on you than
you normally have when we have [an asymmetric directive].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I don't consider that a restriction
on me. This is something that I want to do.
I think it is important
that I get the views of this Committee before making this particular
decision. Frankly, I don't consider it a diminution of the Chairman's
power; I want to emphasize that.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I also assume that if something
really ugly happens that has nothing to do with the things we're
talking about here, you will always have-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me put it this way. I've been
around this Committee for a number of years and I think I can say that
I pretty much know how every single member of this Committee would
come out under [any given hypothetical] event. In other words, I
could take the vote myself if I had to and I bet I'd get it on the
nose three times out of four! The reason for that is that I know
where you're all coming from. We get updated periodically on what our
basic views are. So, I don't consider that a major concern.
Obviously, I'm not arguing that we are setting any precedents; this is
not a precedent.
This is something quite extraordinary. I hope that
we don't have to talk again shortly; but if we do, we shall. And with
that I would like to get a vote on an asymmetric directive and have
the Secretary read it.
MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint would or
slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected

-55-

5/18/93

to be consistent with appreciable growth in the broader monetary
aggregates over the second quarter."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR.BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President McTeer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Stern
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Officially our next meeting is when?

July 6-7.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. July 6-7.
I assume that all of you are
joining us for lunch to give our best wishes to Jerry.
END OF MEETING

