Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 20, 1997

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 20, 1997, at
9:00 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Guynn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Meyer
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Rivlin
Messrs. Hoenig, Jordan, Melzer, and Ms. Minehan, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stem, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, Eisenbeis, Goodfriend, Hunter, Lindsey, Mishkin,
Promisel, Siegman, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate
Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

5/20/97
Messrs. Madigan and Simpson, Associate Directors, Divisions of
Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics respectively,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Conrad, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago
Messrs. Dewald, Hakkio, Ms. Krieger, Messrs. Lang,
Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, New York,
Philadelphia, Dallas, and Cleveland respectively
Messrs. Cox, Rosengren, and Weber, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Dallas, Boston, and Minneapolis
respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
May 20, 1997
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move approval of the
minutes?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring to a package of six
colored charts with a peach FOMC Class II cover. [Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The dollar/yen decline from May 5 through this
morning is as sharp as I recall a major exchange rate ever moving. Is my memory faulty or is
this a quite extraordinary shift?
MR. FISHER. Yes, it is extraordinary. I'm sorry that I don't know precisely how
it compares with large movements in the past, but I think the shift over this period of several
days now exceeds the dollar/yen move during February 1994 after the Clinton/Hosokawa
disagreement on trade. I can't recall any larger move over the last 5 years.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have any evidence that the Bank of Japan
was selling U.S. Treasuries in this period?
MR. FISHER. No.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In other words, you are not picking up evidence of
official intervention in the data or other sources of information, and as far as you can see, the
currency price change is strictly the result of private market forces.
MR. FISHER. That goes one step further than I would be comfortable with. Let
me try to explain what I only hinted at in my statement, namely, the impact on the dollar of

5/20/97
intervention by the Bank of Thailand and other Asian central banks.- I will try to be pithy
about this. I think the simplest example is to take the Hong Kong dollar but only as a
hypothetical case; that currency did not come under much pressure in this period. As you
know, Hong Kong runs a peg to the U.S. dollar. If $20 billion, for example, moves from
Hong Kong to Japan and the peg is maintained, the one thing that we know will happen is
that the dollar will go down against the yen. Now, if we extrapolate that to Thailand just for
purposes of an example, that country runs a peg against a currency index in which the dollar
has a roughly 80 percent weight. When the Thai authorities defend their currency, funds
flow out of Thailand to repay leveraged financing in Tokyo. Thailand defends the baht by
selling dollars either spot or forward, and the net effect shows up in dollar/yen movements to
the extent that the Thai authorities are successful in maintaining their peg to their index,
which they have so far. So, I think the dollar/yen was affected to a significant extent by
some of the intervention in defense of Asian currencies and other currencies in this period. It
was not a direct effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since we know the particular days when the dollar
was under real tension, and I presume that we at least had the benefit of some judgment from
market sources, if not officially, as to when a lot of the intervention and related movements
of funds was occurring, can we trace such intervention to the actual days in which the dollar
was particularly weak against the yen?
MR. FISHER. Yes, the dollar's weakness occurred on the days when the Bank of
Thailand initially intervened in size, May 6 and 7, but not so much in the days that followed.
May 6 and 7 were days when the Bank of Thailand's defense of its currency was building
up, although there were indications that they had been defending their currency for a while

5/20/97
on a modest scale. It was at the start of that week of May 5 to 9 that Thailand announced
some disappointing forecasts for its budget and economic growth for the coming year.
Pressures began to build on their currency, and the exchange market activities were thought
to be related to that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It doesn't necessarily have to happen immediately.
MR. FISHER. No, no.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What happens is that portfolio adjustments start to
cascade-MR. FISHER. Yes, precisely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And it takes a few days at least for that to work its
way through. A lot of it is essentially automatic because individuals have no particular desire
to sell dollar holdings, but they end up with a maldistribution to which they have to adjust,
and that is what has been happening. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. Peter, what do you think you learned from the April surprises
affecting the federal funds rate, or what do you think you need to learn before next April?
MR. FISHER. That we all need to go back to the drawing board on forecasting
taxes, and I will not pretend to be the expert on that subject. I think our projection problems
were universal--New York, the Board, and the Treasury. None of us had it right. Mike Prell
may be able to offer more insights into this than I. Such a study clearly will require a major
effort. We had some rather big surprises last year, and to be candid we thought we had
learned from them. So, that is a major area for study.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do we have sufficient regional data to help us
locate as we go along where an excess Treasury balance is coming from?

5/20/97
MR. FISHER. No, we do not. There is a rather disappointing inability to take the
Treasury tax information and quickly derive statistics that we would find useful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have daily information on some regional
characteristics of the tax receipts, and we know from the statistics of income where there are
big capital-gains taxpayers and what may change. Has anyone been able to infer anything
from the regional pattern?
MR. PRELL. I am not aware that anyone has tried that; it is an interesting idea. It
sounds like a lot of work.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Big Blue could do it. [Laughter]
MR. PRELL. I am not sure that we have that much free computer space right
now! We can check into it.
MR. FISHER. The other part of your question, Governor Rivlin--or the other part
of my answer--is that I was very pleased that our announcing the quantity of RPs helped the
market get a quicker handle on how far off we all were on our forecasts, and that I think was
a help. We did operate twice in one day on two occasions. That was not to fine-tune the
rates but because of the paucity of propositions we had from the dealers and how far off we
were going to be unless we tried to add some reserves by going back into the market. I think
the dealer community responded rather well to that in terms of not thinking we were flying
off the handle. The added flexibility to the Desk was helpful. I think the tools worked fairly
well. The first time we had a big miss in propositions, it did occur to me that it might be nice
to be able to do foreign exchange swaps to inject reserves when there was a paucity of
collateral. I don't think it was really necessary, but that thought at least crossed my mind.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.

5/20/97
MR. PARRY. Throughout this period, wasn't there evidence of a reduced appetite
for U.S. securities by Japanese investors and some speculation that the Ministry of Finance
actually had played a role in this reduced appetite?
MR. FISHER. Anecdotally, we at the Desk have heard the same stories. I have
not been able to see that in any data anyone has shown me, but there are some lags in this
process.
MR. PARRY. There will be data on that?
MR. FISHER. There will be some data on that. I have heard it said by a number
of people whose views on the markets I respect that they think the very sharp movement in
the dollar/yen means that U.S. Treasuries are now at attractive levels for Japanese investors
to purchase on the principle that they have taken losses and it is done. I think that the net
impact of these movements has been to produce a fairly good two-way market. Clearly,
there was some aggressive verbal intervention, both public and private, on the part of the
Ministry of Finance. I think that is regrettable, given the nature of the volatility it has
engendered.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Peter, in your statement, you said that you thought there were
more adjustments to come in the dollar/yen. I don't know if that had to do with portfolio
adjustments. Can you elaborate on that just a little?
MR. FISHER. I just mean that this is only an initial round of market expectations
that the Bank of Japan may start tightening sometime later this year. Differentials remain
rather wide against yen fixed-income assets. I do not mean to draw a perfect analogy from
this, but in 1994 the Committee started raising rates in February and we all remember the

5/20/97
Orange County bloodbath in December. That was a full thirteen months after long bond
yields started to back up in October and November of 1993. There are different
mark-to-market conventions in Japan. Some institutions do not have to; they can just hold
their fixed-income assets at historic cost. Others have to mark to market. We have a more
mark-to-market financial system than the Japanese. That does not mean the losses in Japan
are not buried there somewhere. They are, but they do not come to the fore as quickly.
Foreigners who borrow at low interest rates in Japan are subject to a mark-to-market
discipline.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Peter? Would somebody
like to move approval of the Desk's operations?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval of the domestic operations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, is there a second?
SPEAKER(?). Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Let us move on to the economic
report, Mr. Prell.
MR. PRELL. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Carol Low is distributing a
table to which I will be referring in a couple of minutes. [Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mike?
MR. JORDAN. Mike, the story you tell about the past and your concerns about
the future are consistent with a supply side surprise--a productivity shock. In a passive sense,
what happens is that we accommodate the existing demand because we peg a nominal
interest rate while the natural rate--the real rate--is shifting up during the period. We see not
only an acceleration in nominal spending growth but in money and credit growth to go along

5/20/97
with it and make it all possible. What are the dynamics, then, that cause this process to
reverse and growth in nominal spending to slow? I am referring to your baseline forecast and
not to your concern about the upside. Is it not true that, in effect, the natural rate shifts back
down and we then get the slowing that the staff is projecting in money and bank credit
growth? We get what you refer to as a fairly attractive scenario.
MR. PRELL. You are talking about the natural rate of interest, I presume.
MR. JORDAN. Right.
MR. PRELL. I guess one could interpret what I have said about the stocks of
capital goods and so on as implying a lower natural rate going forward. One could look at
this from various vantage points. Whether, indeed, one should view the development of
surprisingly strong growth over the past year as a favorable supply shock, I am not sure.
There certainly are some elements in the picture that support that view. The labor force
growth that we have had over the past year might fall in that category. If one felt that we
were seeing something more than the normal kind of cyclical kick to productivity over the
past couple of quarters as output growth surged, say from strengthened aggregate demand,
then that might be characterized as a supply shock. I am not sure that conclusion is clearcut.
Indeed, by our normal rules of thumb and model results, I do not think we have had any
more productivity acceleration in the past couple of quarters than one would have expected
with a surge in aggregate demand, a rise in output, and firms being able to get more mileage
out of their existing resources.
MR. KOHN. President Jordan, in thinking about the real rate relative to its
equilibrium or natural level, I don't believe that a real rate a bit below its equilibrium level,
as apparently it has been, would be inconsistent with the staff forecast. In fact, it is perfectly

5/20/97
consistent with the economy producing at a level beyond its potential on a sustained basis
and inflation just creeping up under those circumstances. It would not necessarily be the case
that if the real rate were a bit below its equilibrium rate, the gap between where the economy
was and its potential would widen. So, I do not think the staff forecast requires the
equilibrium rate to drop back down again. In fact, the staff forecast is consistent with the
equilibrium rate being a bit above where real rates are right now.
MR. JORDAN. I am not clear on that. I understand that your framework is
different, but if growth in nominal demand accelerates to a rate of 8 percent, as it did in the
first quarter, what are the dynamics that will cut such growth in half unless you say the surge
is all statistical error and it will unwind itself? But if the dynamics of your adjustment
process include an accommodation in behavior to the increase in nominal demand, what
causes the second difference to turn negative?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I answer that? I think there are two factors
that, taken together, are consistent with your framework. One involves inventories. If we
have a buildup in inventories that is incapable of being sustained at the same rate, we do not
have to have a change in the actual interest rate versus the natural rate for the growth process
to turn down. What we have here is an adjustment process that is not affected by the
differential between the actual and the natural rate. Secondly, there is a serious question here
about seasonal adjustments. If growth in nominal demand was significantly higher,
seasonally adjusted, in the first quarter because the weather was warmer than usual, and such
growth was unusually low in the second quarter, you would not be looking for an explanation
in the real world. I suspect that the combination of both of those factors is enough to explain

5/20/97
the full shift in the nominal GDP. I do not know that for a fact, but it is certainly going in the
right direction.
MR. JORDAN. For confirming evidence of that, we would expect to see slower
money and bank credit growth emerge in this period. At least the staff projection, I take it, is
that we are going to get that. Some of the surge never was real because it reflected bad
seasonals and an inventory buildup that will go away. To be sure that interpretation is right,
we would need in a sense to accommodate a much slower growth of money and credit;
otherwise we missed it.
MR. PRELL. Barring some shift in the demand for money--this is almost
tautological--we would expect to see slower money growth with the moderation in nominal
GDP expansion that we are anticipating. But our forecast in a sense says that, on an
intermediate-term basis rather than looking quarter-to-quarter and defining movements in
natural rates of interest in that sense, we have the actual rate too low relative to the natural
rate to bring us back to equilibrium between actual and potential output. In other terms, we
have an ongoing gap between the natural unemployment rate and the actual unemployment
rate and some tendency for inflation to pick up.
MR. KOHN. In our judgment, President Jordan, we are seeing some slowing in
money growth in recent months when we abstract from the accumulation of balances for the
payment of taxes. In looking through that kind of thing and taking account of the fact that
we have essentially a no-growth forecast for M2 in May, we think that the rate of growth in
that aggregate has in fact decelerated a couple of percentage points from the first to the
second quarter.

5/20/97
MR. JORDAN. As you know, we use MZM to monitor how these things happen
because it does not have the sweep problem. It grew at a rate of 8 percent in the first quarter,
right in there with nominal GDP. For the second half of this year, we would expect MZM to
get down to a 3 to 4 percent growth rate if this forecast is right.
MR. PRELL. As we have pointed out previously, the money demand relationship,
the relationship of velocity and opportunity cost, has been quite stable over the past couple of
years. And we have not had a big movement in interest rates, so you would expect close to
equal growth of M2 and nominal GDP.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, any further questions for Mike? If not,
would somebody like to start the Committee discussion? Mr. President.
MR. MCTEER. Me?
MR. PARRY. From the Republic of Texas. [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. President of the Republic of Texas.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just remember that we cannot take a position on
political issues. [Laughter]
MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, the Republic of Texas and the Eleventh District
are much the same for all practical purposes, and they both continue to do as well as the
national economy. Our job growth has been converging on the national mean for about a
year, after several years of stronger growth. Positive factors contributing to the performance
of the Eleventh District include the continued recovery of the Mexican economy, the more
recent recovery in semiconductors, and technology-driven gains in oil and gas exploration.
Based on my careful monitoring of cocktail party conversations--which I consider
an important part of my job description--I can report that Texas is experiencing a mild but

5/20/97
discernible mood shift having to do with the incipient recovery in commercial real estate.
There have been several recent sightings of the construction crane, which had been the
national bird of Texas [laughter] but which has hardly been seen in the past 10 years and was
thought by many people to be extinct. The emerging mood is one of exuberance, although
tempered and made more rational by the long memories of the people with whom I hang
around. But even rational exuberance makes many Texans nervous given the bust that
followed the previous boom. That sort of caution, of course, is to be expected and
welcomed.
However, I hope the crowd around this table does not become overly nervous
about the recent show of strength of the national economy. If the first quarter's 5.6 percent
real growth rate is too much for comfort, I suggest that we focus on the real final sales
number of only 3.8 percent. That is still a high number, but we are already down the road
from the first quarter and have some "reassuringly" weak recent monthly numbers. Let the
record show quotations marks around the word "reassuringly."
Industrial production was flat in April. Payroll employment growth slowed in
March and April. Retail sales declined slightly in April after being flat in March. Producer
prices have declined for 4 consecutive months, down .6 percent in April. CPI increases also
have moderated as energy prices have reversed last year's buildup. The Greenbook has real
GDP rising only at a 1.8 percent rate in the second quarter and for the next 6 quarters it
projects growth rates of 2.5, 2.3, 2.1, 2.0, 1.9 and 1.9 percent. As I understand it, these
projections assume no fed funds target rate increase until mid-1998. Even if strong real
growth were something to fear, those numbers would hardly seem frightening. Actual
measured inflation also has declined in recent months. The Greenbook has the first-quarter

5/20/97
CPI rate at 2.3 percent; its CPI forecast for the second quarter is 1.2-percent; then it rises to 3
percent in the second half of 1998. So, the Greenbook is forecasting rather slow real growth
as well as rather low CPI inflation. While I do not remember past Greenbooks as well as
Jerry Jordan, I do recall that in recent times the Greenbook has underestimated real growth
and overestimated inflation more often than the other way around. If that pattern is repeated,
it would make the outlook even better than the Greenbook anticipates.
In terms of guides to monetary policy as it is currently practiced, I do not know
what is the precisely correct federal funds target rate. Apparently a lot of people, including
Gail Cincotta, thought the correct rate was precisely 5.25 percent and that 5.5 percent is a
travesty. I do not know, but I will note that when the recently lower inflation rate is taken
into account, the funds rate probably has increased by more than 25 basis points in real terms.
Also, the recently reduced need for federal deficit financing seems to make the current target
rate tighter in some sense than it otherwise would be.
If we look to market-based indicators as guidelines, they are fairly reassuring.
Despite the recent backup in the yen, the dollar remains on the strong side and is probably
putting direct downward pressure on import prices and indirect downward pressure on the
prices of exportable goods. Commodity and metals prices, including gold, also reveal little
buildup of inflationary pressures in the pipeline. Unfortunately, money growth has picked up
recently to levels that used to be inflationary. I hope the Greenbook is right in attributing that
money growth to the April surge in tax receipts, which should indicate a near-term reversal.
In any case, money growth is about the only evidence that suggests to me the need for some
urgency to counter a potential rise in inflation. Otherwise, warning signs are conspicuous by
their absence.

5/20/97
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry from the Republic of California.
[Laughter]
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, strong economic growth has continued in the
Twelfth Federal Reserve District in recent months, although the pace has slowed slightly in
some of the fastest growing states. During the first quarter of 1997, District jobs expanded
by 3-1/2 percent at an annual rate. In the fastest growing states--Nevada, Arizona, Utah, and
Oregon--growth is averaging between 3-1/2 and 7 percent. With the exception of Alaska and
Hawaii, employment growth in the other District states is running at or above 3 percent.
Construction and services continue to be the fastest growing sectors in the District economy,
but manufacturing is becoming a key contributor to the growth in District employment.
Manufacturing employment grew by 3 percent at an annual rate during the first quarter, as
rapid expansion in high-tech and aircraft production was boosted by growth in food
processing and textile industries.
Accompanying strong employment growth has been a recent surge in the District's
labor force. In most states, labor force growth has been broad-based. In California, however,
our estimates are that perhaps one-half of the new labor market entrants have transitioned
from welfare to work and are competing for a narrow range of low-skilled jobs. Of the total
number of U.S. welfare recipients who must leave the rolls before July of this year, over 38
percent are in California. If all of these individuals move into the labor force, labor force
participation in California will increase by 1/2 percentage point.
Despite rapid labor force growth, strong employment demand is creating tight
labor market conditions in several parts of the District. The District-wide unemployment rate
has fallen by 1/2 percentage point over the past quarter, and in several areas in the District

5/20/97
competition for employees is so fierce that employers are holding job fairs and offering
finder's fees and signing bonuses to recruit new hires.
Turning to the national economy, the risk that inflationary pressures are building
seems to me to have increased since our March meeting. The economy's rapid growth in
recent quarters means that it is now operating at a noticeably higher level according to both
the unemployment rate and the estimated GDP gap. The unemployment rate is now clearly
in the inflation danger zone even when we take into account the rather large standard errors
that characterize estimates of NAIRU, and the excess of real GDP over its potential level rose
to about 1-3/4 percent in the first quarter according to our estimate. In addition, the
industrial capacity utilization rate is somewhat above the level at which inflation typically
has accelerated in the past.
With these indicators presenting a fairly uniform picture of excessive pressure on
resources, I believe there is good reason to be worried about the trend of inflation in the
future. Given this situation, the key question is whether real GDP is likely to slow enough
and for a long enough period of time to eliminate inflationary pressures. Like the
Greenbook, our forecast for the current quarter shows a rather sharp slowing of growth; our
estimate is 2 percent for the current quarter. It certainly would not be surprising to see such a
pause in activity following the torrid pace of the first quarter. Looking to the second half of
the year, we expect growth to come in at around the trend rate of 2 percent. This would still
leave the unemployment rate at just under 5 percent at the end of 1997.
The bottom line is that it is unlikely that the basic problem of pressure on
resources would be solved anytime soon with an unchanged funds rate. My best judgment at
this point is that underlying inflation would show a modest upward trend this year and next if

5/20/97
monetary policy remained unchanged. Of course, when we look at the CPI, a good deal of
the upward trend would be obscured by the higher dollar and lower price of oil, not to
mention the methodological changes being introduced by the BLS. As always, of course, we
should acknowledge that this forecast of rising underlying inflation could turn out to be
wrong for a number of reasons. For example, it is difficult to judge the magnitude of
possible roles for enhanced productivity or changes in the labor market in holding down
inflation. However, I believe that even with a slowdown in growth in the current quarter, the
risk of rising inflation in the future has increased to a serious level.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you. First, I want to comment about your speech at NYU a
couple of weeks ago. I thought it not only was very effective but also very welcome even
though the wire service types still do not know the difference between nominal and real
GDP. It is worthwhile to continue to press on those issues. I have grown increasingly
concerned that, with people on both the political left and the political right criticizing us, they
could together foster a general environment of open season on the central bank. Criticism on
either side does not constitute a great risk to us, but here we have a sort of unholy alliance of
reasons to criticize us. So, I thought that your making the speech at that time was very
desirable, and I hope that when you get the chance to testify on the Hill in July, you will be
able to press the same arguments and maybe get some people to start listening.
Probably like others around the table, I spent this long interval between meetings
traveling around the District to a lot of meetings, sometimes in small communities. One
word that summarizes attitudes is "sobering." I noted a dramatic shift in mood and concerns

5/20/97
everywhere that I was traveling. I want to run through some of the highlights of what we
have been hearing.
Executives in the steel industry are very concerned about the surge in imports
stemming from very strong demand. Some interpretations of developments in the last couple
of quarters suggest that we were fortunate in being able to draw in a lot of imports because
the latter helped to hold down prices and minimize inflation. But both the steel companies
and the auto companies know that once these foreign manufacturers get a foothold in our
marketplace, they are very hard to dislodge.
Domestic steel companies are saying that their inventories are too high and that
they are going to be working to get them back down. Specialty metals producers report that
raw materials prices are up very sharply and their plants are running flat out. They say that
their sales to aerospace firms are booming and that they have no more capacity to satisfy that
market. They are now engaging in what they call precautionary ordering. They say that
there are widely perceived shortages and longer delivery times and that sales in their medical
equipment market are strong and getting stronger worldwide. A number of these companies,
including some glass and rubber companies, indicate that they are revising up their sales
projections for the second half of the year and that they are going to have a better year than
they thought at the outset of the year. Oil and gas companies are saying that their operations
are running flat out and that they do not have additional capacity to meet expanding market
demand. Retail sales, though, have softened very considerably in the last few weeks after
what retailers characterized as a surprisingly strong first quarter. They said that we should
expect to see very aggressive efforts to move merchandise in the weeks ahead.

5/20/97
Labor market developments are unsettling. Union contract settlements in the first
four months of this year were above those in the first four months of last year. The increase
is not dramatic, but it is clear that the trend of successive contracts resulting in successively
lower settlements is over, and it is just a question of how fast the increases will occur from
this point. Entry-level wages are jumping throughout the District. We talked to bankers who
said that they are losing employees. When we ask where those people go when they leave,
the bankers say mainly to local school districts and to city and county governments. The
dynamics are that tax revenues are very strong in these communities, and they are replacing
retirees and others and adding staff at wages that are substantially above the earlier prevailing
wages. In two different areas that we visited, bankers said that last year their starting wage
for a teller was $5.50 per hour, whereas it is now $8.00 at one bank and $9.00 at another, if
they can find someone who is qualified. This kind of increase, of course, is raising their
whole pay structure.
Farmland prices are a problem. As recently as last November, we were not
hearing any reports of transactions that we would have characterized as speculation in
farmland. No more. People are saying that farm prices are now 20 to 25 percent above
where they were a year ago. One banker terms the increases that he sees as "scary." He says
that on the basis of current crop values the price would pencil out to about $1,500 per acre.
A year ago the prices were in the range of $1,800 to $2,000 per acre. He says it is typical
now to see them at $2,300 to $2,500, and everyone wants to borrow on the basis of this
newly perceived higher level. I have two reports, one from south central Ohio and one from
western Ohio, of foreign investors coming in and paying twice the highest price recorded
previously in the county for large chunks of farmlands. I have two other reports, one in

5/20/97
Kentucky and one in western Ohio, that the Federal Farm Credit Banks are very aggressive in
lending and are now willing to engage, once again, in types of financing that they did in the
late 1970s and early 1980s. They stopped such financings in the mid-1980s, but they are
starting to do them again.
Contacts in residential construction say that they are experiencing the same level
of activity as in the spring of last year. One difference is that last spring the construction was
all under contract; this year more than half of it is speculative. With regard to bank lending,
one banker on our board said that there are no standards. Bankers are just pirating each
other's loans. We asked one large banker what we would look for as large banks moved
toward caution in their C&I lending, especially after our March move. He said that every
deal was skinnier than the previous one, and that deals are now being done that would not
even have been considered last summer. Small and medium banks say that they have
become more cautious on consumer lending, and as a result, in order to achieve their profit
plans, they have become more aggressive on business lending.
In the large manufacturing sector, we talked to representatives of quite a few
companies both at our board meetings and as we traveled around the District. They say that
they are convinced that 1997 will be a better year than they had anticipated, and, therefore,
they are stepping up their capital spending for the year from what they had planned earlier,
and they are placing larger orders for the second half than they had anticipated coming into
the year.
On the national economy, the first time we got a look at a Greenbook forecast for
1997 was in September 1995--that's the way the timing usually runs. At that time, we had a
5-3/4 percent federal funds rate, and the projection showed nominal spending growth of less

5/20/97

than 4 percent for 1997. That definitely was a favorable outlook, and it looked as if we were
on a track to move nominal spending down toward a rate of growth that we would think of as
approximately consistent with price stability. But now we have nominal spending growth
closer to 5 percent for 1997 even with the deceleration that the staff is currently projecting,
and out through 1998 such growth is projected to remain above 4 percent. So, while we had
what I thought was a very favorable trend a year and a half ago when we first starting looking
as far out as 1997, the attainment of such growth has now been pushed well beyond the
current forecast horizon.
What are the risks? If the Greenbook is right and we do get the projected
decelerating growth in activity in the second quarter--and it is widely perceived on the basis
of monthly reports and other evidence that this will be a soft quarter--whether growth for the
quarter comes in at the projected 1.8 percent is not the important thing so long as the
outcome is in that direction. And if we also are getting a lower increase in the CPI--and it
may not get down to the projected 1.2 percent but again assuming it is in that direction--then
what are the chances we would want to do something in July? We would not have any hard
evidence that would justify tightening in the minds of many people who watch us. By
August, second-quarter information is essentially all we are going to have and only very
tentative indications of how the third quarter is shaping up. Even in September, we would
not have much more in terms of hard numbers except for some additional monthly readings.
So, it will probably be November before we will have the kind of hard evidence at hand to
justify in everybody's mind the need to do something. That would be very late. For me, the
policy issue is not a question of a little now or a little later. It may turn out to be a question
of a little now or a whole lot later.

5/20/97
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I will start this comment off the same way I
started my comments at the last several meetings: Economic activity in the Fifth District is
still very strong. The survey readings for our manufacturing and services sectors did slip a
little in April, but they remained very close to the high levels to which they had jumped in
March. This indicated a rate of expansion in our region that we had not seen since the first
half of 1994. Moreover, our directors and other contacts suggest little, if any, softening in
demand. Labor markets remain very tight. The demand for lower skilled labor continues to
increase at a substantial rate. Despite some reports of rising wages recently in some parts of
the District, we have had fewer reports of price pass-throughs in the last several weeks than
we were getting a little earlier this year and that I reported on earlier.
The most striking new development in the District is something that fits in with
what Mike Prell said about commercial real estate. In our real estate markets, especially in
northern Virginia, we are told that rental rates for industrial and office space have now gotten
back to the peaks that they reached in 1989. Also for the first time in this expansion, we are
getting increasing reports of speculative building, especially of office buildings in northern
Virginia.
Turning to the national picture, the Greenbook projects that real GDP growth will
slow of its own accord in coming months. Certainly given the extraordinary growth we have
seen in the last couple of quarters, some slowing seems likely. But as I see it, nothing in the
fundamentals really assures us that the rate of expansion is going to slow to trend. That
obviously is what needs to happen if we are going to avoid a boom. I think that is the point
Jerry Jordan was making in his question earlier. On the contrary, the staff candidly

5/20/97
recognizes in its write-up that household fundamentals and general economic fundamentals
remain exceptionally strong. I continue to see some significant upside risk in the outlook.
The projected deceleration reflects in considerable part reduced inventory building after the
big run-up in the last quarter, as Mike Prell emphasized. In this regard, the Greenbook
authors do not seem to be concerned that a constrained availability of supplies will generate a
precautionary demand for inventories at this time as it did in 1994. That conclusion may be
right, but if it is, the interesting question is why. Maybe firms wanted extra stocks in 1994
because they were not sure that monetary policy would do what was needed to contain the
expansion. Maybe they have more confidence in us this year, and if that is the case, I think
that would underscore the important role our own credibility needs to play in generating and
reinforcing the sustained moderation in economic activity the staff is projecting. In any case,
I think stock building needs to be counted as an upside risk in the near-term outlook.
Another considerable upside risk in the Greenbook forecast is that the projected
increase in the labor force participation rate will not happen. The Greenbook is projecting a
real GDP growth rate of 3.1 percent for 1997, and that is expected to take the unemployment
rate down to 4.8 percent by the end of the year, leaving it around that level through 1998. If
such a rate is sustained for that long, it could in itself create capacity problems. If the
expected further increase in labor force participation does not occur and we still get the
predicted growth, obviously the unemployment rate could be driven even lower. Given the
relatively moderate increase in productivity the staff has forecast, I think Mike Prell made the
point that payroll employment has to rise 2 percent to generate the 3 percent growth
projected for this year. That is twice the longer-term trend growth in the labor force.
Increased participation may bail us out. It bailed us out last year; maybe it will do it this

5/20/97
year, but then again maybe it won't. Of course, an alternative possibility is that productivity
will rise more rapidly this year than the 1.2 percent increase the staff is projecting because
the trend rate may have moved up to 2 percent or so, as a number of economists and others
are arguing.
Let me conclude with just a couple of brief remarks about what this alternative
scenario might imply for aggregate demand and interest rates. This is a little
counter-intuitive, but I think even this possibility involves an upside risk. Let us suppose that
markets are confident that the Fed will conduct policy so as to hold the CPI increase to a rate
of 3 percent this year and that inflation expectations are anchored at 2 percent--that that is not
an issue. Let us assume in that environment that the productivity trend increases. What
does that do to financial markets and specifically to real interest rates? Broadly speaking, the
improved productivity trend is going to cause firms to expect higher future earnings and
workers to expect higher future wages. The point that needs to be emphasized in this
situation is that, at the existing level of real interest rates, businesses and households are
going to want to bring some of that expected future income into the present. Workers may
want to fix up their houses; business firms may want to invest in new plant and equipment;
and they will try to do this by borrowing against expected future increases in income. But, of
course, the economy does not have the future income and output yet so real interest rates
have to rise in order to restrain this new demand for credit. In effect, the higher real rates
raise the price of current consumption in terms of future consumption foregone so that firms
and households will be content to wait until the economy actually has the output in hand
before they try to consume it. The point of the story is--and this is the bottom line--that even
if the productivity trend turns out to be higher than the staff is assuming, which would

5/20/97

remove some of the inflationary risk stemming from the labor markets, real interest rates
would still need to rise to prevent a further credit-driven increase in aggregate demand.
In sum, Mr. Chairman, I see considerable upside risk in the staff forecast, and I
think we need to be in the market for a little more insurance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Philadelphia District economy
generally continues to operate at high levels, although the rate of growth has moderated some
in recent weeks. The more moderate growth is most notable in manufacturing and auto sales.
Manufacturers generally expect a high level of activity for the balance of the year but
relatively small additional increases. Auto dealers, too, report less than buoyant sales.
Retailing more broadly is doing well, although there is so much competition that anecdotal
reports from individual retailers sometimes understate the broader picture. Restaurant sales
in particular are doing well, which is a fairly good indicator of consumer attitudes.
Construction activity is mixed. The outlook for commercial building in suburban locations is
strong. Buildings are now selling for more than reproduction costs, and there are the
beginnings of some speculative building. On the other hand, some shakeout is likely in the
construction of retail outlets, such as supermarkets, which are overbuilt.
There is more than ample liquidity available, and competition to make commercial
loans is fierce. One executive in a highly leveraged company told me that some lenders are
willing to lend up to 30 percent more than a new acquisition is worth. Some REIT activity
also looks shortsighted. By contrast, however, there does appear to be more caution in the
consumer lending area, particularly in credit cards.

5/20/97
Labor markets are tight in many areas of the District. One sign of this is that
parents, although greatly relieved, are pleasantly surprised that someone is willing to hire
their offspring. There is some upcreep in wages as labor markets tighten around the District.
Many businesses, however, still say that they cannot raise prices and therefore must offset
higher wage costs somewhere else, usually through improved efficiencies.
Turning to the nation, the uncertainties on the demand side of the economy are
greater now than when we last met. There also are continuing uncertainties on the supply
side. On the demand side, growth clearly is moderating more than was forecast at the last
meeting. What we do not know is how long the slower pace will continue. My hunch is that
there is still a fair amount of self-feeding momentum underlying the expansion. When
people earn more and feel more secure in their jobs, they spend more and businesses invest
more.
I think the risks for demand are still on the upside, but there is more uncertainty
than when we last met. On the supply side, the uncertainties remain about as they have been,
although with a higher level of anxiety as the economy moves further into territory not
charted for nearly three decades. Both labor force growth and, apparently, productivity gains
have increased capacity limits surprisingly far without generating broad-based price
increases. The risk is that overheating will occur at some point, and we want to avoid that to
prolong growth. At the same time, we do not want to act prematurely or unnecessarily. On
balance, this strikes me as more of a time for heightened surveillance than for overt action.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy in the Kansas City
District remains strong, but as others around this table have mentioned with regard to their

5/20/97
regional economies, growth in our District has slowed a bit from the-rapid pace of late 1996
and early 1997. Manufacturing and services remain the primary engines of growth in our
seven states. Manufacturers are operating at high levels of capacity, and growth in
service-related jobs is quite brisk. Manufacturing activity has been slowed somewhat
because of strikes. The six-week strike at the GM plant in Oklahoma City has idled about
3,500 workers. The strike issue centers on GM's earlier decision to cut about 900 temporary
workers from its workforce and, as reported to me, that has resulted in a union complaint that
the cut is too large. The union wants GM to hire some permanent workers, several hundred
in fact. There also is a steel strike in Kansas City that is affecting about 1,000 employees.
The issues there are outsourcing and pension benefits; they do not currently involve wages.
Data for the District states suggest that our employment has been about flat since March,
indicating some easing in the region's pace of growth.
Our farm economy and energy sectors are in good shape. The District's winter
wheat crop is in good condition despite freeze damage in some local areas. Soybean prices
have risen, and this is going to be beneficial to producers in our area. Solid cattle prices are
giving the cattle industry its best profits in a couple of years. In the energy sector, the recent
drop in oil and gas prices has not yet affected production. Drilling activity is much higher
than it was a year ago. In fact, there are some reports of capacity constraints in areas like
Wyoming where reported shortages of trained crews are hampering activity.
Retail prices continue to hold steady in our District. The labor markets are tight
and we continue to hear reports of wage pressures. An informal survey of firms in our region
conducted by our Branch directors indicates tight labor markets in nearly all cities in the
District. Labor shortages are pronounced for entry-level workers, as you have heard from

5/20/97
others here, and also for computer and other high-tech professionals: Several firms are
reporting bigger wage hikes than normal, although the number of such firms is about the
same as a month ago or so. So, we are not seeing an acceleration.
On the national economy, we anticipate as does the staff forecast that the
expansion in economic activity will moderate in the second quarter after unusually rapid
growth in the first. However, our estimates do not have the expansion slowing as
dramatically in the immediate future as does the Greenbook. Consumer and business
confidence remains high and income and employment growth appears solid and able to
support substantial growth going forward. Despite this and the fact that resource utilization
has continued high, inflation has been surprisingly well-behaved. Thus, while I remain
concerned and alert regarding the inflation outlook, it is difficult to assess its near-term
course with any great certainty.
Returning for a moment to District developments, like Jerry Jordan I have done
quite a bit of traveling, and what I found particularly interesting in my meetings with labor,
consumer, and business groups is a uniform view that the Fed should ease off in terms of
contemplating any preemptive move. I found that an amazing change because when I went
out before, I heard many people saying that we were doing a good job, that we needed to be
vigilant, and that we needed to be ready to act. I no longer hear that. One group, a rural
group, said that "you guys need to chill out," to use their phrase. What I am saying is that
while we can build a case for a move, the fact that we have not seen the anticipated rise in
inflation come through is leaving a very large number of people less patient with any kind of
action. It is a noticeable change from 6 or 8 months ago, and I wanted to report that today.
Thank you.

5/20/97
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like everybody else, I continue to be
amazed and pleasantly surprised by the strong performance of the economy and the lack of
evidence of imbalances and dislocations, both regionally and nationally. Our southeastern
region now looks very much like the nation as a whole after slowing a little over the last
couple of quarters from the greater-than-national pace that we were seeing earlier. We also
have one of the best balanced economies I can remember, and that balance extends across
both the geographic areas and the various industries that make up the diverse economy of our
Atlanta region.
Like Jerry Jordan and Tom Hoenig, I traveled a good bit during the last eight
weeks. One of the most interesting regional stories that continue to emerge relates to what is
going on in the oil and gas industry. Both Bob McTeer and I have reported before on the
excitement in that industry over the new 3-D seismic technology that has fundamentally
altered the economics of exploration. Bob mentioned it again this morning. At a breakfast
meeting with a small group of business people in New Orleans three weeks ago, an
independent driller told me that the break-even point has now dropped from about $16 a
barrel to about $4 a barrel. Not only will this keep the Louisiana oil patch engaged in a more
steady pace of exploration as the price of oil goes up and down, but it also is having a major
spillover effect on the supporting businesses like rig construction and crew boat
manufacturing. The Gulf of Mexico, which the local people referred to as the Dead Sea
when the price of oil was in the $20-$25 range, is now a beehive of activity with the rig
count up to 218 compared to 166 just a year ago. This is putting some pressure on the
support industries in the short term; daily rates for crew boats are almost double what they

5/20/97
were a year ago. Judging by the backlog of barges and crew boats, it currently takes a much
longer time to complete the planned construction of an oil rig, but my guess is that this
technological breakthrough should help hold down the long-run cost of oil and petroleum
products.
The other very positive story in our region is tourism. Both current and future
bookings are strong, and that is driving the construction of large hotel projects in several
cities and very strong demand for workers in the hospitality industry. Manufacturing, an
industry where we thought we were seeing some slowing at the time of the last FOMC
meeting, recently has shown signs of some pickup back to a moderate pace. Construction
activity, despite some indicators of future slowing, is still at a generally high level. As others
have noted was happening elsewhere, there are more reports of speculative projects, at least
in the Atlanta market.
Labor markets remain tight across our region and across a growing number of
skills. We are still hearing sporadic reports of increased wage pressures and some stories of
nonconventional forms of compensation, as also described in the Greenbook. For example, a
fast food operator came up to me after a recent speech and told me that he had issued over
one hundred W-2s for tax year 1996 for a staff of 13; that reflects a 600 percent turnover rate.
On some days he had to choose whether to operate the drive-in window or the sit-down part
of his restaurant. Also, he was now paying employees for 40 hours of work, but having them
work only 30 hours as a way of keeping them on his payroll instead of someone else's.
On the national level, the broad outline of my own outlook over the rest of 1997
into 1998 is very similar to that of the Greenbook and that of most private forecasters. I see
considerably stronger-than-expected growth for 1997 on a year-over-year basis, a slowing

5/20/97
expansion as we move into 1998, and a modest upward drift in inflation. While many of us
have been making a very reasonable forecast of slowing growth in final demand, and we are
beginning to see some signs that may be happening, there also are some not insignificant
risks on the upside. Consumer spending continues to be the greatest risk on my worry list as
the underlying fundamentals to support continued strong spending still seem to be there:
good job and income growth, record high levels of confidence, and the wild card kicker that
we have talked about before--the rise in the value of assets that have not been appreciably
drawn down. Although less likely, a pickup in export demand and even further inventory
building, which Mike Prell alluded to as a possibility, could contribute to greater than
expected growth. For me, the risks are still on the upside.
Recent inflation remains low by all conventional measures, lower I think than
almost all of us expected. As all of us have noted before, there is growing evidence that
underreported productivity gains and broad resistance to price increases are the biggest
factors that have restrained general price advances in this cycle compared to those that we
have seen in the past. At the same time, my own forecast, as well as those of most private
sector forecasters and the Greenbook, shows a gradual upward drift in inflation at the end of
1997 and into 1998.
Obviously, the central policy question continues to be whether the stance of policy
is too accommodative and, given the persistence of robust demand, how strongly we feel
about not risking a loss of the ground we have gained in keeping inflation low. With the
economy having gotten to a point where it must be near full employment, if not beyond it, we
have a unique opportunity with little downside risk to lean a bit more against the expected
upward creep in inflation that most of us are forecasting and, in doing so, to underscore our

5/20/97
resolve and credibility in the minds of financial market participants, -business
decisionmakers, and the general public. I also find myself wishing we had been more
successful collectively in making the case for low, perhaps even lower, levels of inflation so
that our various publics would be supportive of such a tightening move. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, the Seventh District economy continues to
expand at a modest rate, and abstracting from the effects of the strike in the automobile
industry, our manufacturing sector still seems to be outperforming the nation. Our labor
markets are still very tight. The unemployment rate for District states has moved down
again; it was 4.1 percent in both February and March. Payroll employment growth in our
states continues to lag the nation, but many contacts regard this as a labor supply problem.
Despite the tight labor markets, we still have not seen much upward pressure on wages, and
District manufacturers and retailers continue to report that competitive pressures inhibit their
ability to raise prices. There was an article in this morning's Washington Post about
Milwaukee, Wisconsin that described this phenomenon in great detail. It is a phenomenon
that I hear mentioned almost every time I speak to someone in the manufacturing industry.
Another indication is that steel price increases of 3 to 5 percent announced for April and May
are not sticking and in some cases are now being publicly rescinded.
It is clear from the published data and from our anecdotal information that the
economy in the United States and the Seventh District has slowed from its rapid first-quarter
pace. As Bob Parry mentioned before, the key question is the extent of the slowdown and

5/20/97

whether it is sufficient to return the economy to a path of sustainable growth without an
acceleration in inflation.
Since we all have seen the published statistics in the Greenbook, let me focus on
some of the anecdotes. First, with regard to signs of slower growth in business activity,
retailers generally report that sales were sluggish last month. One large national retailer
attributed the noticeable slowing in part to poor weather, and preliminary results from our
survey of Michigan retailers show a moderating sales performance last month and some
inventory buildup. As we all know, light vehicle sales in April were well below the
first-quarter level. Our contacts report that sales so far this month have been somewhat
stronger than in April but still below the sales pace expected for all of 1997. In the paper
industry, we had reports of slowing in corrugated paper shipments as well as in heavy paper
production. A very large telephone company in our area reported a slowdown in the number
of lines installed in small businesses and homes during March and April. This is a markedly
different pattern from that of the last two years, and our contacts believe it reflects an
industry-wide slowdown rather than a loss of market share.
On the other hand, we also have had reports of strength from a number of our
industry contacts. Heavy trucks continue on a strong recovery path from last year's
depressed levels. The uptrend in sales and production of farm machinery equipment also is
continuing. One national specialty realtor told us that land prices and rental costs for retail
stores, both freestanding and in malls, are moving up rapidly. This is similar to some of the
other comments made here today about real estate. Contacts at one large airline in our
District reported very strong business, with forward bookings through the summer setting
records for both business and vacation travel, and they believe that the forward bookings at

5/20/97
other airlines are also very strong. Next Tuesday, May 27, Manpower Inc. will publicly
release the results from its Quarterly Employment Outlook survey; this information is
confidential until May 27. They will report third-quarter hiring intentions in all regions of
the nation, particularly in the Midwest, as the strongest since the boom years of 1988 and
1989. The chairman of Manpower believes that part of the demand is for seasonal workers,
but some of the hiring plans are for jobs that firms have not been able to fill because of
widespread labor shortages. So, the anecdotes and the published data paint a mixed picture
of the expected extent of the slowdown in the expansion and the inflation outlook.
It is clear that the first-quarter growth rate is unsustainable, but we do not know
whether inflation will continue to be restrained by the temporary damping factors that we
have discussed for some time. If growth fails to moderate sufficiently just as these
restraining factors lose their punch, we run the risk of opening up a sizable output gap with
its attendant inflationary consequences. As additional data for the second quarter roll in, I
think we must be on the lookout for the moderation needed to avoid accelerating inflation in
the months ahead. I am concerned that imbalances may emerge later this year, so I still see
the risk as being on the upside.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy in the Ninth District
remains healthy. The expansion is continuing; it remains well balanced and broadly based
both geographically and by industry. There are three or four developments of relatively
recent vintage that are worth commenting on. First, there was a very severe flood in the Red
River Valley that runs between Minnesota and North Dakota and on into Canada. This flood
has been very disruptive in that part of the world, but it probably will not have any broad

5/20/97
ramifications for the national economy or even for the District economy as a whole. Of
course, part of its effect will be reversed because, while wealth has been destroyed, economic
activity tends to pick up as replacement activity occurs. There also were significant losses in
some of the cattle herds around the District due to the severe winter this year, and that is a
double-edged phenomenon as well because, for those people who did not lose cattle, prices
have improved recently.
At our recent directors' meeting and also at a meeting of our advisory council, a
couple of things of interest came up. One is that we have further confirmation of the tautness
of the labor markets in the District. If we look at the District data, as best we can get a
handle on them, employment gains over the past 12 months outpaced the increase in the labor
force by a significant amount. Our directors and advisory council people are very explicit
about labor shortages and about very, very tight labor markets. That is not new; it is just a
confirmation. They also indicated, and I think it is fair to say, that there have been some
signs that wage and now price pressures are becoming a bit more generalized than formerly
was the case. Business people are still very wary and talk a good deal about how competitive
the business environment is, how difficult it is to raise prices, and how cautious they are
about doing that. At the same time, I think they will admit that price increases are perhaps
becoming more commonplace than was formerly the case in the District.
With regard to the national economy, I will strike a couple of familiar themes. I
am sympathetic with the general pattern of the Greenbook forecast and with Mike Prell's
description of where the risks lie. That is, I think they lie in the direction of our possibly
getting a more rapid increase in aggregate demand than the Greenbook envisions, and that
will lead to greater price pressures. In part, I feel that way because I am not entirely

5/20/97
persuaded that aggregate demand will slow as appreciably as is indicated in the Greenbook.
There are a couple of reasons for that. First, the increase in wealth over the past 2-1/2 years
or so has been enormous, and it seems to me that the implications for consumer spending are
quite straightforward. It is just a question of degree. Secondly, I have a sense that the
outlook for BFI is quite positive. So, it seems to me that the risks, in terms of how demand is
likely to perform, are more on the high side. We may continue to get some very favorable
developments on the supply side. We all have spent a lot of time trying to analyze exactly
what is going on there and the extent to which that will continue. I do not have a conviction,
but I would not place a large bet on favorable supply side developments continuing much
longer; at least, I would not make such a wager without very favorable odds.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There is not a lot to report that is
new about the First District. The regional economy, despite the slow-to-arrive spring
weather, continues to hum along at a rather rapid pace, buoyed by solid job growth at about
the national pace, which is good for our region. There are low unemployment rates--in fact, I
believe New Hampshire at 2.1 percent has the lowest unemployment rate of any state in the
country--and moderate increases overall in prices and wages. Competition continues for
specific skills so that we do continue to see a heating up in total compensation. Contacts in
retail and manufacturing report solid growth over a year ago, and there are expectations that
this favorable trend will continue. The District's high-tech industries--software, biotech,
hardware producers, and telecommunications--remain extremely vibrant and continue to face
a shortage of technical employees that I have mentioned in the past. On the financial
services side, we have a sense that the downsizing in the commercial banking industry

5/20/97
locally may be moderating as firms realize that they cannot prosper any longer simply by
cutting costs alone. They need to generate revenue and improve customer service. Insurance
companies, on the other hand, may have just started on a trend of downsizing and
consolidation. This is in direct contrast, of course, to the firms in the money management
and mutual funds industries that are growing by leaps and bounds. This growth plays out in
quite low office vacancy rates, particularly in the Boston metropolitan area; the low vacancy
rates have spread from downtown Boston all the way out to Route 495. Contiguous office
space of any size is just not available. Rents are rising and new construction cannot be far
behind though, unlike reports from some other areas of the country, we are told that
developers in our region continue to be wary of building "on spec" after the lessons of the
1980s.
Turning to the national scene, I am impressed a bit by the tone of somewhat quiet
desperation in the Greenbook forecast. Things are really quite good, but we seem to be
frustrated by our inability to gauge either the strength of the economy, even into the current
quarter, or the quiescence of inflation. There are a lot of questions. One of them is when the
current combination of very favorable trends will come to an end. It's not that we
necessarily want them to end, but we would like to know when the economy will slow,
perhaps on its own as a result of the projected moderation in the growth of consumer
spending, a worsening of net exports, and a decline in residential investment. Alternatively,
at what point will overall resource utilization become so tight that the wage-price spiral will
take off? Just as important as these two questions is which of these reversals to trend, if they
occur, will happen sooner. In my view anyway, the likelihood is that resource utilization will
begin to bite before the strength of the economy wanes. It is true that the current economic

5/20/97
data show signs of some slowing but, frankly, some slowing from a first-quarter pace of 6
percent is inevitable and necessary. However, if one looks to the first half of the year, then
assumes that the Greenbook is right about the degree of slowing in the second quarter, which
may or may not be accurate but let us assume it is right, we still have GDP growing in the
first half of 1997 at a rate that is nearly double our current estimates of economic potential.
Will growth in economic activity moderate for the rest of the year as the Greenbook expects?
Maybe, but we still see healthy job creation, good income growth, high consumer
confidence, good business confidence, and booming financial markets. The same factors
persist that have caused our projections of economic growth to be off the mark fairly
consistently through 1996 and 1997. I must say that I remain agnostic about whether growth
will slow in line with the Greenbook forecast, at least without some shock to the economy
that no one is forecasting at present.
We, along with others, have been wrong about inflation. We have underestimated
the potential of the economy to grow at a solid pace without the usual bottlenecks associated
with tight resources. It would be comforting to think that this can continue, but here I am
also agnostic. If we think about our estimates of labor market tightness not as a point but as a
range of uncertainty that is fairly wide around a central tendency and we consider both the
experience of the late 1980s and the current data, I am drawn at least to the proposition that
we have not had sufficient constraint on resources long enough to produce the smoking gun
of a real inflationary increase. But I do not think we are very far away from this, particularly
given the continued labor market tightness projected in the Greenbook and elsewhere.

5/20/97
So, despite the recent indications of a slowing expansion, I think the risks are still
strongly asymmetric. If anything, the Greenbook likely understates both growth and
inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. The Eighth District economy continues to grow
moderately, with firms reporting sales increases and net new hiring. Labor markets are
generally tight. In March, the unemployment rate in Missouri was 4.2 percent, the lowest
since 1979. District automotive production by Ford and Chrysler was up 1.1 percent in the
first quarter from the fourth quarter of 1996. Second-quarter production is expected to
increase another 2 percent. Resolution in early May of the Mound Road engine strike in
Detroit put about 2,500 auto workers, who had been out about a month, back on the job
making pickup trucks at Chrysler's St. Louis plant. March flooding along the Ohio and
Mississippi Rivers and tornadoes in Arkansas, Tennessee, and Kentucky led to about 6,000
claims for unemployment insurance. Estimates of total storm damage are sketchy but may
total around $80 million for infrastructure alone.
Nationally, real GDP growth in the last four quarters is just over 4 percent,
matching the best performance since 1984. If adjusted for a change in survey methodology,
the April unemployment rate would have been 4-1/2 percent, a level not seen since 1970.
What about the future? Recent forecasting records have not been good. In October 1996,
many forecasters projected that the economy would grow at an annual rate of less than 2-1/2
percent in the fourth quarter; that, of course, turned out to be well short of the observed rate
of 3.8 percent. In January of this year, many forecasters projected that the economy would
grow at a rate of less than 2-1/2 percent in the first quarter, and that forecast turned out to be

5/20/97
even further short of the observed rate of 5.6 percent reported so far. In the current quarter,
forecasters are again projecting growth at a rate of 2-1/2 percent or less. They may be right
this time, but with such a record, it is hard to argue that monetary policy actions should be
based on forecasts of short-run real economic growth.
It is essential for us to maintain a longer-term orientation focused on the general
level of prices, which is all that monetary policy ultimately can influence. Inflation has been
running at a rate close to 3 percent for the past five years, and it has continued at about that
rate so far in 1997. Thus, I see little reason to believe that the longer-run inflation trend will
decline. Looking forward, the risks remain on the upside. Broad money and credit have
been growing rapidly, which could easily translate into upward pressure on demand growth
and inflation. Because the economy remains so strong, we have an ideal opportunity to take
a longer-term view about appropriate action to temper inflation risks.
While sending a message that our intention to cap inflation at 3 percent is
desirable, it is a mistake to give markets the impression that inflation near 3 percent is
consistent with our long-run price stability goal. The most recent IMF report on the world
economic outlook posed the question: Is inflation outside a range that the country's
authorities consider to be consistent with price stability? According to the IMF report, the
answer for the United States was "no." I think the question is a good one and the FOMC
might benefit from discussing it. My judgment is that there is less than a percentage point of
bias in the CPI and, accordingly, 2-1/2 to 3 percent inflation is not price stability in spite of
the views that the IMF reports. Furthermore, I certainly am uncomfortable with an IMF
forecast of U.S. consumer price inflation in 1997 and 1998 that is higher than that of any
other G-7 country.

5/20/97
To clarify our goal, we need to get our inflation measurement straight. How can
we answer the question about whether current inflation is consistent with price stability
without being clear about what we are talking about: CPI, core CPI, median CPI,
experimental CPI, GDP or PCE price indexes, or something else? We certainly need to be
specific among ourselves if not before the public. How should we interpret the current 1997
and 1998 forecasts in the Greenbook of an acceleration in the GDP chain-weighted price
index and the core CPI and a deceleration in the overall consumer price index? Is inflation
accelerating or decelerating?
At our February meeting, there was general agreement on the need to be more
explicit among ourselves about what we mean by price stability: what measure to emphasize,
where we want to be with respect to that measure, and ideally a time frame to get there. I
hope we can continue that dialogue at our July meeting and sharpen our internal
understanding of our long-term objective.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic
growth in the Second District has slowed somewhat on balance from the brisk pace reported
for the first quarter. Payroll job growth remains fairly strong, with employment levels
running more than 1 percent ahead of a year ago. New York State's unemployment rate held
steady at 6.3 percent in March, and New Jersey's went down to a cyclical low of 5.2 percent
in April--the data for New Jersey come in earlier. Retail sales were generally below plan in
March and especially in April, though much of the weakness was concentrated in seasonal
merchandise and was attributed to unseasonably cold weather. Consumer confidence
retreated in March and April and remains the lowest in the nation. This may seem rather

5/20/97
surprising given the fine economic performance of New York City, but that performance is
attributable mainly to Wall Street and tourism. The northern tier of New York State from
Buffalo to Albany and most of the way down the Hudson Valley is an area of psychological
depression, where some breakdown in the leadership of the private sector is looking more
and more apparent. We go to various places, even large cities like Syracuse, and are
beckoned to take over the private-sector leadership of the community, which is a somewhat
depressing experience. Commercial and residential real estate markets, especially around
New York City, are continuing to gain momentum. In the early part of this year, permits to
build new homes were up about 20 percent, led by the multifamily sector. Office vacancy
rates have continued to fall in Manhattan, and we hear more and more discussion of new
office construction, even of "spec" buildings.
On the national level, we too were surprised by the very strong first quarter, but we
see the economy slowing to a growth rate of about 1-3/4 percent this quarter followed by
growth at a rate of about 2 percent for the rest of this year and the two following years. We
believe that the unemployment rate will stay near its present level of close to 5 percent during
that period. As others also have noted, the strong dollar has helped price performance this
year, both because of its drag on the economy and its direct immediate effect on prices. In
addition, some recent research we have done at the New York Bank has convinced us that the
microeconomic effect of the dollar's recovery since 1995 on the relatively open U.S.
manufacturing economy has restrained both wage increases and investment growth in 1996
and thus far in 1997. This, we believe, has been a more important contributor to the excellent
price performance in the manufactured goods area than generally has been realized. The

5/20/97
other side of that coin, of course, is the additional inflationary effect of a weaker dollar
through that channel in the future.
We use the gap between actual and potential GDP as the best tool of inflation
forecasting. That tool helps us understand why the good performance of inflation is less
mysterious than it has seemed. The recent large discrepancy between the income and the
product sides of the national income accounts and the unexpectedly large tax receipts suggest
that GDP has been underestimated, meaning that productivity was underestimated. We think
that is very important because it is a sustainable phenomenon that does not require a train of
happy events that seem to have come together mysteriously to give us good results. So, we
think that what appeared to be a sizable gap between actual and potential GDP really was not
very substantial at all before the burst in growth in the last two quarters. If we take account
of that burst of growth and then assume a trend rate of economic expansion, we conclude that
real GDP is now somewhat above potential and likely to stay that way. Consequently, we,
like the Greenbook, are forecasting accelerating core inflation. However, we keep on being
surprised by an excellent inflation performance. What, therefore, should we conclude?
In more than two decades of trying to make a living in the private sector, it always
seemed to me that if we have less confidence in a forecast, we should be less activist and
more cautious in our decisionmaking. I asked Rick Mishkin to see if there was some
economic research about policymaking in times of uncertainty. The principal author of such
research is Bill Brainard, who is Chairman of the Board of the Boston Fed at the moment.
The conclusion of that research is that the greater the uncertainty about the economic model
and its forecast, the more cautious we should be in changing policy instruments. I was very
happy to hear that economic research and two decades of private-sector experience seemed to

5/20/97
be in "sync." That suggests to me that, although our point forecast for inflation is for a fairly
substantial acceleration, there is a great deal of uncertainty around that point forecast and
therefore less information in output gaps about the path of future inflation. Accordingly, we
need to look elsewhere for hints of inflationary pressures. The recent core CPI inflation
number does have some troubling elements, particularly the rise in core services inflation
which we think is the sector most susceptible to wage pressures being passed through to
prices. But we have just one month's data, and we probably should not leap to a conclusion
based on such limited data. Apart from that evidence, we see no hints of increasing
inflation. We conclude that caution is the appropriate lesson to be learned. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. It seems to me that we are witnessing a very impressive
performance by the U.S. economy. Everything that has been said around this table today and
for quite some time is testimony to the basic strength and resilience of the economy and its
ability to restructure itself. But we really do not know very much about how it is doing that.
This is going to be a plea for trying to find out more.
Over the last few months, the economy has seemed to be handling the tightness of
labor markets remarkably well. We need more information about exactly what is happening
to different kinds of wages in different labor markets. We do not know a lot about that. The
anecdotes convey the impression that labor markets are tight everywhere, employers are very
short of technically skilled and especially computer skilled people, and they are going after
them any way they can. But basically, given what has happened over the last few months,
we have to conclude that we have very flexible labor markets and a very flexible economy.

5/20/97
Companies are doing a lot of training; they are doing a lot of upgrading; they are doing a lot
of job reorganization; they are substituting capital for labor. They are doing something right
or this tight labor market would have gotten out of hand long before now. But we do not
know very much about all of that.
I met with Bill McDonough's boards, including the Buffalo board, and I was struck
by the comments of one director--I think it was the chairman of the Buffalo branch--who was
complaining that Columbus, Ohio had held a job fair in Buffalo. [Laughter] That is too bad
for Buffalo, I guess, but it is exactly the kind of thing that ought to be happening. Columbus
is doing the right thing. People are moving around; employers are looking for employees
either by recruiting them to come to their workplace or by moving their operations to other
places. Something is working quite well here, but we clearly do not know enough about it.
We also don't know enough about what is happening to productivity, which is the other side
of the same coin. The anecdotes are much more positive than the staff forecast of a return to
trend would indicate. The staff is quite rightly worrying that as employers dip down into the
unemployment pool, they will have less skilled workers, and that may take us back to a
slower productivity growth trend. I'm not sure there are enough of those people; I suspect
that their number is too marginal in relation to the overall number of workers to outweigh
what may be happening to productivity generally as this flexible economy adjusts to the
shortages in skills. But the fact is that we do not know. If my assumption is right that we are
going to be struggling with these questions for some time to come, then clearly we should
think about how we could get data that could fill the gap between aggregate statistics like the
employment cost index, which don't tell us a great deal, and the anecdotes that we trade
around the table.

5/20/97
It seems to me, as it seems to almost everybody, that the risks clearly are on the
upside with respect to inflation and that the question to be discussed later in this meeting is
whether we move now or move later. It seems to me that we sent a very valuable signal in
March, namely that the Fed is awake and watching. The question is whether it would be
better to send the signal now that we are still watching or leave it out there to be used later.
One final word about the other piece of good news, the budget deal. I am more
positive than some in the press have been on the importance of this deal. The cynics seem so
eager to be cynical that they point out that the deal does not involve a big cut in spending, but
that is partly because we have done so well already. The deficit was down to 1 percent of
GDP, so there was no need to cut spending much further. It is also because the big core
pieces of the reductions are cuts in future rates of growth in Medicare, but it was extremely
important to do that. It does not make it less effective that those are reductions in future rates
of growth. The third point is that the spending cuts are to some extent offset by increases in
spending for education, but this is an opportune time to do that. Such spending will involve
more than just the national government, obviously, but if we as a nation can improve
education and training over the next several years, we will be in better shape to take
advantage of this huge opportunity that is presented to us by the very tight labor markets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.
MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It has been almost two months since
our last meeting, but in many ways the economic situation seems like more of the same:
strong growth in both demand and production, continued expectations of a slowdown, and
inflationary pressures that generally seem to be contained. I don't see any need to review all
the underlying factors, but I would like to comment on a few that seem particularly important

5/20/97
with respect to their contribution to the potential strength and length of the current expansion.
The first factor I would point to is one that was mentioned by Gary Stem,
business fixed investment. This is an area the strength of which generally has been
underestimated in this expansion, although the current Greenbook forecast does have a
higher increase in such spending. Both construction and equipment expenditures have been
adding to capacity. Not only is this investment allowing business firms to meet rising
demand without having to increase prices, but it may also be generating some productivity
increases. This productivity hypothesis is supported by continued strength in profits. I agree
with Governor Rivlin that we do not really know how this is happening, but we can see the
bottom line, which indicates that despite increases in unit labor costs--and those costs are
rising at a faster rate than general price increases--businesses have been able to maintain their
profits without raising prices.
All of this business fixed investment has been supported by a very favorable
financial environment. Not only has the financial environment supported growth, but it also
has allowed firms in the nonfinancial sector to strengthen their balance sheets. Internal
financing has been available. The bond market has been deep and liquid and has provided
significant debt financing opportunities. I would note that the spreads on speculative-grade
debt are particularly low, so that even higher risk companies have had access to the debt
market at favorable rates. Bank credit has remained available. Commercial delinquencies
have been relatively low, so the outlook is good there. Securitizations of commercial credits
have made this source of credit even more reliable. On the equity side, we have seen IPO
issuance decline a bit from last year, but equity via IPOs is still available at a reasonable

5/20/97
price, particularly for firms with strong earnings outlooks. In short, the availability of
financing will not be the culprit if business investment falls off.
In the U.S. economy, a forecast of the macroeconomy cannot ignore consumer
spending, but I'm not sure that the prospects for such spending have changed much. I
continue to believe that the most likely outlook is for sustained growth in consumer
expenditures at a rate that about matches income growth, the so-called Goldilocks outlook. It
is not too hot in that consumers are too leveraged to finance purchases with much more debt,
and pent-up demand is an unlikely factor at this late stage in the business cycle. On the other
hand, it is not too cold in the sense that unemployment is low, sentiment is good, and the
wealth effects from the stock market should continue to provide some strength. So, I do not
think that there is any reason to anticipate a slump in consumer spending.
The federal deficit situation is one of the factors that could throw the economy off
this path to yet another soft landing, but as Governor Rivlin mentioned, the outlook for the
deficit is actually a little better. The budget deal is good news, although we do have to
recognize that there are some structural budget problems that still have to be addressed. We
certainly are a lot farther down that trail than we were several years ago.
There can always be an external shock, and Mike Prell mentioned the possibility
of Mideast oil disruptions. On the international side, net exports have been a drag on the
economy, but at least for now the domestic economy is strong enough to offset weakness
from the external sector. In addition, the strong dollar has been providing some salutary
effects in the inflation area.
It does seem to me that with this fairly strong outlook, the risk does remain on the
upside with respect to inflation. It is hard to judge how long employers can continue to

5/20/97
absorb wage increases without raising prices. I will say that I was comforted by the recent
inflation reports, and like President McTeer, I was particularly comforted by the decline in
the total PPI thus far this year and the rise of only. 1 percent in the core PPI. I would point
out, however, that after declining earlier the core CPI has now been flat for two years, so the
progress that we had been making in terms of this key inflation measure seems to have
stopped.
To wind up, I do think that there are tentative signs of a slowdown in the
expansion and, as support, I would point to IP and to auto and retail sales in April. I think
the risks to the economy are concentrated on inflation, but the news in that area indicates that
the near-term threat appears to have abated a bit recently.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Earlier when President McTeer was
about to begin the "tour de table," reference was made to the recent episode of the so-called
"Republic of Texas." If I understood President McTeer correctly, his reply was that the
Republic of Texas and the Eleventh District are about the same thing. As Chairman of the

Bank Affairs Committee, I can verify that that is correct. [Laughter]
The outlook for the balance of this year and next appears to be heavily weighted in
the direction of offering a very attractive period of continued growth, a high level of
utilization of the economy's resources, and an inflation rate that may begin to growl but
almost certainly not to roar. Given that likelihood, I think it is appropriate to focus, as the
Greenbook does at the end of its first section, on the forces that might be influencing the
trend of events going into 1999 and out from there. Addressing the latter point, how should
we think about policy for 1999 and forward?

5/20/97
Let me outline briefly two strands of thought in the context of our national
economic goal of maximum sustainable growth, which we at the Fed believe requires price
level stability as a prerequisite for success. First of all, we reversed policy at the last
meeting. After holding our fire for many quarters in the face of rising labor market
pressures, seeing a very strong surge of activity in the first quarter, which was counter to
expectations, the FOMC raised the federal funds rate by 25 basis points. In absolute terms,
this is a modest move, but such impact as it will have has not yet fully been felt. I believe it
carried two meaningful psychological messages. First, there is a new policy paradigm in the
sense that the basic thrust of monetary policy is now toward tightening. And second, the Fed
continues to have no intention of permitting inflation to get a grip on the economy. I am
entirely comfortable with that decision. In my opinion, it clearly was the right thing to do.
With that decision behind us, where do we stand today? The pace of economic
activity, while still moving forward, appears to be slowing. The employment cost index
moved up modestly in the first quarter. Most commodity prices are flat to down. Unit labor
costs do not appear to be accelerating. Profit margins continue to be strong and deterioration
there should provide us with an early warning of inflationary change. There appears to be no
fear of inflation embedded in the yield curve. As I peruse the Beigebook, I have to go back
to check the date because it continues to read precisely the same as it has for well over a year.
My best judgment from all of this is that growth will continue, and we are seeing likely but
not definitive signs of incipient inflationary creep. But in terms of our stated national
economic goal, that does not seem to pose a clear and present danger.
Moving to line-of-thought number two: In the absence of a settled notion of the
definition of price level stability, I think a responsible judgment can be made that we are now

5/20/97
either in that zone or very close to it. If the CPI measurement is about a percentage point too
high, the real CPI is now increasing at a rate between 1 and 2 percent. Almost all the other
price indexes indicate a steady rate of inflation in the 1 to 2 percent range, although some
measures, including the core CPI, suggest that inflation may be beginning to edge up. The
Chairman's qualitative definition of price stability, namely that we are there when inflation
concerns are removed from economic decisionmaking, appears largely to be in place. If we
are in or very close to the price stability zone, again in terms of national economic goals, the
relevant question becomes how we hold the economy there and keep it robust.
First of all, if higher-than-trend growth continues or resumes soon--and it well
may; I think the growth risks are on the upside--that clearly would seem to require additional
tightening, perhaps a good deal of it. But if the economy returns to a trend rate of growth or
slower than trend, there may be a significant probability, given the economy's performance
characteristics over the past two years as a guide, that we will not need to adjust policy for
some time and indeed there is no absolute certainty as to which direction we may ultimately
move. Further, we do not satisfactorily understand why the economy is working so well
right now. If we were to cut its momentum back too much too soon, we might forego a
precious opportunity to learn more about what could be some critically important new
realities. In my view, the risk/return ratio of alternative policies evaluated against national
economic goals provides ample reason for waiting to see what happens as events unfold.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. My reading of first-quarter performance and incoming monthly
data suggests the economy will slow sharply in the second quarter in line with the Greenbook

5/20/97
forecast. Special factors boosted growth in the first quarter while payback and special factors
are at work in the current quarter. Inventory investment clearly is playing an important role
in the near-term dynamics. On the other hand, the fundamentals supporting the expansion
remain very positive and suggest a rebound in the second half to at least slightly above-trend
growth. As a result, the economy is likely over the forecast horizon and in the absence of
further policy action to remain at the high level of labor resource utilization rates reached in
April.
Monetary policy decisions are appropriately conditioned by the inflow of data
between meetings. I want to focus on an interpretation of that data, and there certainly was
something for everyone in that data. First, we had the first-quarter GDP report with its
surprisingly robust growth immediately followed by a decline in the unemployment rate in
April to a 23-year low and to a level outside the narrow range that had prevailed over the last
year and half. Second, we had reasonably strong evidence of a sharp slowdown in growth in
the second quarter. Third, we had better-than-expected performance in labor costs, focusing
on the first-quarter ECI report and the April reading on average hourly earnings, combined
with mixed evidence on inflation. On balance, the evidence did not suggest a trend toward
higher inflation, but it seemed to indicate a reduced prospect that core CPI inflation is still
declining.
The data on the unemployment rate signal higher inflation risk. The information
on current quarter growth, particularly when combined with the Greenbook forecast of
near-trend growth beyond the second quarter, suggests less risk of further increases in
utilization rates. But these two developments do not offset. The threat of continued
above-trend growth we faced at the last meeting has already delivered its consequence in the

5/20/97
form of higher utilization rates. In the framework of utilization and growth risks that I have
been using to assess the risk of higher inflation, the data since the last meeting simply have
transformed growth risk into utilization risk. This was a bad trade from the perspective of
inflation risk. We traded a speculative increase in utilization rates, because that is what
growth risk is, for a realized increase in labor utilization rates.
There are at least two sources of increased uncertainty suggested by the flow of
data between meetings. Such uncertainty sometimes encourages caution in policy action, and
I expect it to weigh on our decision today. First, there may be greater uncertainty about the
second-half outlook, given the sharpness of the slowdown that now appears under way in the
second quarter and given questions about the degree and persistence of the expected slowing
in inventory investment. That is, even though the combination of stronger-than-expected
first-quarter growth and the sharp slowing projected in the Greenbook for the second quarter
leaves the first half stronger than was projected at the last meeting, the distribution of that
strength over the two quarters might add some downside risk to the second-half forecast.
Second, the better-than-expected performance of labor costs in the first-quarter ECI report
and the April reading for average hourly earnings might increase further the uncertainty
about the estimate of NAIRU and hence increase the uncertainty about the degree of
deterioration to be expected in the inflation outlook if the economy returns to trend growth
and the unemployment rate stabilizes at its current level.
I believe that the fundamentals supporting the expansion remain very positive. I
am going to focus on two examples of the positive underlying fundamentals: financial
conditions broadly defined and consumer confidence. We might ask what factors have
contributed to the strong above-trend growth over the last year and a half. A supportive set

5/20/97
of financial conditions certainly seems to have been a factor. Financial conditions either
have been sufficiently stimulative to promote this strength or not sufficiently restrictive to
prevent the resurgence. Borrowing terms generally are viewed as attractive for home buying,
for consumer durable purchases, and for business fixed investment. If there is a problem, it
is the excessive amount of borrowing that some households would like to undertake under
prevailing financial conditions.
How have financial conditions changed since the March 25 policy action? That
action was widely anticipated, so it largely was reflected in financial market conditions at the
time of the move. Since the March move, however, long-term interest rates have edged
slightly lower, the stock market has rallied, the dollar first rose and then declined to below its
initial level. A monetary conditions index for the United States, which took account of
short-term and long-term interest rates, the stock market, and exchange rates would, I
believe, show more favorable financial market conditions today than was the case
immediately following the March move.
I do not ordinarily place great weight on measures of consumer confidence in my
own forecast, so I don't want to oversell the significance of the latest reading when it
supports the case I want to make. But the preliminary report of the Michigan Consumer
Sentiment Index for early May was extremely interesting. It shows a decline in the index as
it relates to current economic conditions that are consistent with the projected near-term
slowing. But it also indicates a sharp improvement in expectations about future conditions
supportive of the prospect of a solid second-half rebound. Let me read you a few sentences
from Richard Curtin's interpretation of the early May data on consumer sentiment:
"Extraordinary strength was recorded in consumer sentiment during the first half of May,

5/20/97
with the Sentiment Index reaching a new record level. The early May gain reflected
consumer reactions to the very favorable economic news that has dominated the headlines:
record low unemployment, strong GDP growth, and a resurgent stock market. Moreover, in
sharp contrast with the initial reaction to the interest rate hike, consumers have now
concluded that the recent increase will have little, if any, impact on future economic
conditions. To be sure, consumers have not changed their views that further interest rate
hikes would be forthcoming in the year ahead. Consumers, however, no longer expect those
rate increases to damp income gains nor to represent a barrier to planned purchases."
My conclusion is that the projected slowing in the current quarter is part payback,
part special factors, part breather, but not likely to be the beginning of an extended period of
below-trend growth. The underlying fundamentals remain very positive. As a result, from
the perspective of monetary policy, we should give appropriate attention to the level of
utilization rates. For better or worse, this is what will determine the course of inflation over
the coming quarters.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you all. I think we can go for coffee.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Shall we resume? Mr. Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. (Statement--see Appendix)
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, let me start off. I think
the probability that we are in a very unusual era is rising. A number of developments point
in that direction, and they raise some very fundamental questions about how to view this
economy and how to implement policy. At the risk of being a little more definitive than

5/20/97
indeed I think is appropriate, let me sketch out what I believe may well be happening, put
that scenario on the table as a hypothesis, and then try to see what its shortcomings may be.
First, we have some very significant and unexpected evidence that profit margins
are still rising at this late stage of the business cycle expansion. The preliminary earnings
reports suggest that the domestic operating profits of nonfinancial corporations showed a
fairly significant rise in margins for the first quarter. When we add in the dramatic rise in
foreign affiliate earnings, which have increased despite the rise in the dollar, we find a quite
impressive increase in total profits. That is, if we start with the firms in the S&P 500, whose
domestic earnings are rising faster than those of smaller firms, add in the smaller companies,
and allow for the nonpublic corporations that also appear in the national income accounts
data, we see that total domestic operating margins are moving higher.
This has a very interesting implication for what is going on because if we
disaggregate the data for nonfinancial corporations, it turns out that the estimated rate of
increase in total unit costs from the first quarter of 1996 to the first quarter of 1997 is close to
zero. This total, which combines unit labor and unit nonlabor costs, has been moving lower
in recent years; that is, the rate of increase in underlying total unit costs has been slowing.
The number for the first quarter of 1997, which is a rough estimate at this point but one that
is based on accounting relationships, is the best that we have seen in a while. If we believe
that the price data are reasonably accurate, meaning that the bias is not changing very much,
and if we believe the profits estimates are about right--the latter are based on independent
earnings reports--then, by arithmetic, total unit costs could not have changed much. If we
subtract nonlabor unit costs, which are comprised essentially of capital consumption
allowances and net interest per unit and which combined have been falling for quite a while--

5/20/97
you may recall that we discussed this a couple of meetings ago--the residual, unit labor costs,
can be seen to have increased at a rate of about 1 percent in the past year, and that rate of
increase, too, has been falling.
Any reasonable set of numbers for average hourly compensation, which has been
rising in this period, permits us to derive productivity numbers that are accelerating
significantly--up roughly 3 percent from the first quarter of 1996 to the first quarter of 1997.
Now, one should remember that this productivity estimate does not cover the full economy.
When we try to reconcile this estimate with the published nonfarm business sector
productivity data that we usually deal with in our models, we run into that large anomaly of a
long-term decline in productivity for the noncorporate business sector. This decline makes
no sense. It seems to me that all the anecdotal evidence that comes to our attention is
consistent with the data we are getting in the nonfinancial corporate area. Those are the data
that everyone sees. The rest is an unfortunate fabrication that I think is distorting what we
are looking at and that distorts our policy view, with potentially significant consequences.
It may well be that the rise we have seen in nonfarm business output per hour,
which is the official series, may to a large extent be explainable through econometric analysis
by the increase in the rate of growth in the economy. But I have more difficulty with the
sharp acceleration in nonfinancial corporate productivity. There is an inflection point in
those data that shows up very clearly in the last couple of years. The question is, why? What
does it mean? Is it a statistical aberration or just a shot out of the blue? Here we have
another unexplained set of data that I must say have been bedeviling me for quite a while.
This may suggest the explanation: If we look at the high-tech investment area or
more generally the high-tech portion of gross domestic product, whether in nominal or real

5/20/97
terms, we get a gradual increase through the 1980s and early 1990s.- But starting in 1993,
such investment tilts up sharply and progressively, and its rate of growth has not turned down
since then. The question is, why? One must assume that people make investments because
they perceive prospects for increasing profitability. Indeed, the presumption is that each
company has looked at its opportunities for profitable capital expansion and decided that
such investment was a good idea. We have seen a fairly dramatic increase of capital
investment in the high-tech area, less growth in the non-high-tech area, and in-between
increases in the intermediate types of investment.
This raises the very interesting question reminiscent of the 1989 hypothesis of Paul
David of Stanford, which I discussed at some length in previous meetings. He argued that
the reason why the huge amount of computer investment prior to 1989 did not show up in
productivity was not that it was inefficient investment but that, as in the development of the
electric motor at the turn of the century, certain synergisms need to build their way into the
system before productivity gains can emerge from a major new technological insight. You
may recall that, in what I found to be a very persuasive paper, Professor David looked at the
1920s and the pattern preceding it and developed a view with respect to the gradual buildup
of synergies after the introduction of the electric motor. The latter initially displaced the
steam engine that had largely driven transmission belts utilizing the advantage of gravity in
tall buildings. The electric motor could not do much to increase productivity in that
environment. But as soon as the tall buildings were replaced by flatter ones the synergies
began to take hold and productivity picked up very substantially in the 1920s. Professor
David's view was that today's high-tech change represents a comparable situation.

5/20/97

Indeed, if in retrospect this hypothesis is correct, what has happened is that the
synergies finally came together in recent years mainly as the software industry in this country
expanded extensively and, as you all have observed, computer technology cumulatively
enhanced our production capabilities. We presumably are seeing a rise in the potential rates
of return on marginal investments in a system in which the synergies are coming together. If
that is not happening, it is very difficult to explain the protracted, very extensive expansion in
high-tech capital investment. The question is whether those making the high-tech
investments were right. Did rising rates of return actually materialize? The productivity data
that we are looking at here suggest "maybe." One would expect the rate of return on capital
investment to rise in real terms as productivity increases.
If the inflection in the rate of growth at this late stage in the business cycle is in
fact real--and it certainly appears less and less to be statistical noise as it continues quarter by
quarter--then the issue essentially is why it is happening at a time when the unemployment
rate is so low, when employers are of necessity drawing in marginal workers, even if we
want to argue that they are not doing so extensively. The answer has to be that we are getting
some long-term improvement in productivity performance cyclically adjusted and after any
other adjustment one may wish to make. This would imply in the context of very tight labor
markets that we are also getting a significant shift from labor to capital resources. Indeed,
that would have to be the case. It does not have to be measured physical capital because it
can be intellectual capital such as managerial changes, structural changes, and a variety of
other changes that we do not include in our tangible capital stock. But the question really is
whether we are indeed getting this long-term productivity increase. I will come to the issue

5/20/97
that I think Al Broaddus correctly raised in this connection, namely, the implication that has
for the real long-term rate of interest.
In any event, the pickup in productivity helps to explain why inflation remains so
well contained at this stage in the expansion despite the increasingly tight labor markets and
other developments that, on the basis of our historical models, would have produced
significant inflation. It also may partially explain why nominal and real GDP are as strong as
they are. We need to remember that output does not stem only from the demand side; it also
comes from the supply side. The containment of inflation also is consistent with the general
notion, which we have discussed before, that it is very difficult for business firms to raise
prices in this environment. The reason is that there is enough product slack in the economy
to restrain firms that endeavor to raise their prices because they fear the loss of market share
to competitors who may decide not to adjust their prices higher.
We have what increasingly strikes me not so much as noise in the data but as
growing evidence that something quite fundamental is happening. The important question is
where it goes from here. It is too soon to be sure of any magnitudes. I suspect that the 3
percent growth in productivity that I mentioned may well have occurred in the nonfinancial
corporate area over the last year; incidentally, that improvement has been supported by a
much stronger rate of growth in manufacturing, a significant component of that industry
grouping. If those productivity estimates are correct and the productivity gain is coming
from high rates of return on the capital investment side, then the latter is not about to slow
down much, particularly at the moment.
This analysis basically argues that prices are in check for a while. It does not say,
however, that we have cured inflation or that capacity is unlimited in some way or another.

5/20/97
It does suggest, I think, that we ought to be careful about how we evaluate what we are
doing. While it is certainly the case, as Al Broaddus pointed out and others have implied,
that we do get a higher real rate of interest or, as Don Kohn correctly said, a higher marginal
product, there is a tradeoff. In other words, we get both lower inflation and higher real rates.
Rephrasing what Al said, at constant nominal federal funds rates, we get a higher real
long-term rate and a lower inflation trajectory.
The question arises as to what is the appropriate policy in this situation. It strikes
me that there are risks on all sides because this hypothesis, which I would stress is only a
hypothesis and by no means a certainty, involves some probability of being wrong. My own
guess at this stage is that, even given this hypothesis, the rate of economic growth in the
Greenbook may be too low. I think that the second-quarter number is phony for the same
reasons that people are suggesting the first-quarter number is phony. I believe that there is a
deeper underlying strength in the expansion, as Gary Stem suggested, and I agree with him
that it is very hard to avoid the conclusion that the wealth effect has not spilled over in
certain respects. It does not take very much in the way of a change in core productivity
growth to alter radically the inflation outlook as presented in the Greenbook. If we consider
that employment costs account for 2/3 of total price, then a 1/2 percentage point change in
productivity growth, presuming it affects the total system irrespective of how we may look at
the noncorporate sector, means a difference of 3/10 point in long-term inflation rates. The
improvement in productivity could very well be more than 1/2 percentage point; I do not
have a clue.
All I am telling you is that the numbers do not strike me as evidence that the
old-fashioned model is working. I am not aware of any evidence suggesting that domestic

5/20/97
operating margins are declining in the second quarter. I think the gains in foreign affiliate
earnings are probably coming to a halt, in part because of the lagged effects of the dollar's
strength. But I hear nothing that suggests reduced growth in domestic operating earnings. If
virtually all of the inflation is coming from rising profit margins and the increase in total unit
costs has been near zero for the last year, it just is not credible to assert that policy is behind
the curve. Indeed, I would suspect that the real funds rate, as appropriately measured
depending on how one looks at it, is probably not terribly far from where we want it to be. I
believe the fact that we are getting stronger growth at the current federal funds rate than we
would have expected is a supply side as well as a demand side phenomenon, perhaps more
supply than demand. I am not convinced that the inventory effect may not cause us some
difficulty. It is hard to believe that the inventory growth rate will simmer down and stay
down. The inventory risks are clearly on the upside.
Let me summarize quickly; I have been going on longer than I intended. The
bottom line as I see it is that as I balance the demand side pressures and the supply side
offsets, I suspect that we are going to have to tighten policy somewhere along the line. My
guess is that we will need another 25 basis points, more likely more, by the end of the year. I
would be concerned, however, about moving today. A move would give us too steep a
trajectory for the endpoint of the interest rate pattern. Two things might happen, neither of
which would be terribly helpful. One would be a market presumption that a big increase in
rates is needed, something that I do not think we are in the process of implementing.
Alternatively, and worse in a certain sense, would be the conclusion that the rate increases
are all over, thereby removing the uncertainty that occurs when the Federal Reserve's

5/20/97
Damocles Sword overhangs the economy. That is not something that I would look upon with
great tranquility.
I recommend that we not move today. If we do not, I think the probability that we
will have to move and should move in July is better than 50/50 and, alternatively, the
probability of a move by August is very high. I would add that the odds of a further move in
the fall are better than 50/50. I think it is appropriate in this situation to weigh what seems to
be a very important and fundamental shift that appears to be occurring coupled against the
unquestioned notion that the amount of slack in the economy is not substantial. In that
context, I think we ought to be looking at a potential trajectory for interest rates that is modest
but definitely up. We need to continue to create an element of uncertainty about what we are
going to do in order to damp what undoubtedly are some elements of speculation, especially
in the commercial real estate area.
To conclude, I would recommend at this stage that we not move today but that we
adopt an asymmetric directive. I think that with all of the things I have been saying about
structural change, the risks unquestionably remain on the upside and are likely to be in that
direction for quite a period of time. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, during the go-around I gave
a shortened version, not intentionally, of the very interesting analysis you made of
productivity developments. As I said then, an advantage of attributing the unusually
favorable performance of unit costs to higher productivity growth was that it removed some
of the mystery surrounding that performance. Our previous analysis that attributed much of
the relatively subdued inflation to the dollar and to uncertainty among white collar workers
might be compared in terms of its plausibility to a relay race in which people who never saw

5/20/97
each other before run on the same team and pass the baton perfectly. It was always very hard
for me to believe. So, I think this analysis actually makes a good deal more sense.
I would add as you indicated, Mr. Chairman, that we are dealing with a working
hypothesis, not a proved theory. Therefore, it does leave us with a rather high degree of
uncertainty about what is going on in the economy even though we may be less uncertain. In
the circumstances, caution is the appropriate response.
I agree with the idea that keeping participants in financial markets and the real
economy somewhat uncertain about the exact timing of our moves has considerable merit
since we still have rather frothy asset markets. As I mentioned, we are now heading toward
speculative real estate development in New York. I can support very comfortably your
recommendation of "B" asymmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. I agree. I think your analysis is very appealing. I hope it is right; it
will take us a little while to find out. I believe we all agree that the risks are still on the
upside, that the economy is very strong, and that we probably will have to move again. In
my view, the psychological argument is very much in favor of not moving now because the
markets and other Fed watchers would interpret another move at this time as the end of the
story, especially with the expansion softening. We will have a much bigger psychological
effect if we do not move at this point, and I would support your recommendation, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Let me begin with some further thoughts on the Taylor Rule
perspective on monetary policy options and the changes in initial conditions and forecasts

5/20/97
between this meeting and the March meeting. This will lead me into my own version of the
policy options for today's decision, with special attention to the interpretations attached to
the options. I will conclude with some considerations relating to initial conditions and to
other policy priorities that might justify a willingness to assume greater inflation risks.
The Taylor Rule perspective underlies my strongly held view that prudent
monetary policy should lean against the cyclical winds by enforcing a procyclical pattern in
real short-term interest rates. Specifically, I believe that real short-term interest rates should
rise in proportion to increases in utilization rates over the course of a cycle and that such a
disciplined response is especially critical as the economy approaches capacity. I interpreted
our action at the last FOMC meeting as being justified by a forward-looking version of the
Taylor rule; that is, by a forecast at the last meeting of rising utilization and inflation rates in
the absence of policy action. The wisdom of that move was quickly apparent, to me at least,
in the quicker-than-expected realization of higher labor utilization rates. We might in
retrospect call it a "just-in-time" monetary policy action!
In my view, we tightened in March because we believed that continued
above-trend growth would lower the unemployment rate to or below 5 percent by midyear, in
line with the staff forecast. The unemployment rate is already where we feared it might go.
Why should a forecast of more moderate growth ahead make us more relaxed? All the
forecast of a return-to-trend growth guarantees is that the economy will linger indefinitely in
this precarious position until inflation does turn up.
In short, we have more reason in my view to be concerned about inflation on May
20th than we did on March 25th, not less. If one accepts the view that there is indeed
justification for some tightening, the next question is how much of a cumulative move is

5/20/97
justified by today's initial conditions and how gradually should such a tightening be
implemented over time. We can get some guidance on this subject from alternative
specifications of the Taylor Rule as well as from model simulations of alternative funds rate
paths around the base forecast. I conclude on the basis of guidance from those sources that
the real federal funds rate should move at least percentage point for percentage point with the
unemployment rate, with some of the evidence suggesting that the best stabilizing results
come from a gradual policy response that cumulates to twice this magnitude.
The bottom line of the analysis is that some further tightening appears justified by
current initial conditions and forecasts. On the other hand, it would be hard to argue that
recent data on labor costs and inflation suggest a high degree of urgency about taking the
next step today. I also can accept the wisdom of a view that present uncertainties might
suggest a more gradual implementation of any cumulative tightening than otherwise.
In my outlook statement, I noted two uncertainties that could influence our
judgment today, particularly about the timing of any action. The first is that the data on labor
cost inflation in the period between meetings raised further questions about the estimate of
NAIRU and suggested that the staff forecast of rising inflation at prevailing utilization rates
may be too pessimistic. The second is the sharpness of the projected decline in secondquarter growth, which encourages the Committee to wait until we confirm the expected
rebound. The Chairman has focused on a third uncertainty--heightened by first-quarter
profits data--the trend in productivity growth.
With the above considerations as background, let me offer my own version of the
Bluebook policy options for your consideration. First, we have alternative B, no change.
This alternative could be supported on the basis of two quite different arguments. I want to

5/20/97
place at least as much emphasis on the principles that underlie the action as on the action
itself. Let me call the first rationale for no action the "B/reactive policy" alternative. It
carries the following interpretation: growth is slowing sharply in the current quarter, and it is
projected to be near trend over the remainder of the forecast horizon. Therefore, we can
comfortably return to a reactive posture of watchful waiting. A move to a tighter policy in
the absence of evidence of a sharper rise in labor costs or direct evidence of higher core
inflation would require at least a forecast of above-trend growth if not evidence of persistent
above-trend growth. This justification for no action seems to make growth the issue rather
than utilization rates. It seems to be a surrender to a reactive posture. This approach could
be taken a step further to hold that, given the uncertainty about productivity growth, we
should not even worry about the strength of growth. Do not worry about utilization rates.
Do not worry about growth. Do not worry about wages because their increase could simply
be a response to higher productivity growth. Worry only about inflation, the ultimate
reactive posture. This might be the best we can do if we believe that we know so little about
the structure of the economy that past regularities provide no guidance for current policy.
For my own part, the puzzles of the current episode have not yet pushed me into this camp.
Some might worry that this view suggests that irrational exuberance has affected more than
the stock market.
I will take the liberty of redefining alternative C in my menu of options as 1/4
percentage point of additional tightening today. This would be the second step in a cautious
but still preemptive policy posture. It is justified by the increase in utilization rates since the
last meeting combined with the expectation, consistent with the Greenbook forecast, that
utilization rates are likely to remain at or below this level going forward. In light of the

5/20/97
uncertainties I have previously discussed, we could accompany this move with an
announcement that indicates an intent to pause after the March and May moves. The pause
would allow us to await confirmation of a rebound in demand in the third quarter, to assess
the degree and persistence of the projected slowing in inventory investment, and to evaluate
the implications of additional information on labor costs and inflation and whether utilization
rates were already so high as to yield a rising trend of inflation. The pause also would
provide an opportunity to assess the July NIPA revisions for insights about trend productivity
growth. Given the prevailing large statistical discrepancy and the recent unexpected surge in
tax receipts, there is reason to be particularly interested in this revision.
Let me offer a third alternative as a compromise, which I call "B/go slow," that I
hope is in keeping with the spirit of the Chairman's proposal. Like the "B/reactive" policy, it
calls for no change in policy today, presumably combined with an asymmetric directive that
clearly is justified by the inflation risks in today's initial conditions. But it also carries the
expectation that current utilization rates may justify additional tightening. We postpone any
tightening today in light of present uncertainties in order to confirm expectations that demand
and growth do firm, that unemployment remains at 5 percent or below, and to have time to
assess the implications of additional data on trends in labor costs, inflation, and productivity.
"B/go slow"could be thought of as a slower moving version of "C." It still allows us to cling
to a preemptive posture, but it suggests additional caution in light of the present uncertainties.
It might well be argued that there is only a hair of difference when all is said and done
between any of these alternatives. But a "B/reactive" policy is of great concern to me. It
suggests a willingness to abandon any sense of preemptive policy in favor of resuming a

5/20/97
reactive posture that history suggests will ultimately produce overheating and higher inflation
and that will end up threatening the expansion.
I prefer "C." I think it is the more disciplined policy, the more balanced approach,
but I could live with "B/go slow" if it contributes to a stronger FOMC consensus about
current and prospective policy.
Let me turn now to two quite different sets of considerations that would be
consistent with the choice of a reactive strategy. I am not promoting either of these
justifications--I have already committed to preemptive "C"--but I believe they deserve to be
put on the table. The first is the economic and political difficulty, what I will call a "reverse"
soft landing. I view the monetary policy implementation through 1996 as an attempt to
achieve a conventional soft landing. It involved slowing the expansion to trend before it
overshot capacity, thereby stabilizing inflation and extending the expansion. We already
have seen that it can be difficult to muster public support even for such a sensible policy
effort. Given the recent decline in the unemployment rate, we might now need a monetary
policy that is attempting a reverse soft landing in which we approach capacity from above
and thus require a period of below-trend growth to allow actual output to drift back down to
capacity. Perhaps more to the point, it would be a period of below-trend growth to raise the
unemployment rate back to NAIRU. Such a policy is very difficult to sell and very difficult
to achieve. It might be argued in this case that the best we can do is to attempt to slow the
economy to trend, hope for the best, and react if necessary to clear and persistent signs of
higher inflation. I wonder if this is a factor encouraging some to accept a reactive posture.
A second consideration, and one increasingly talked about, is that a policy priority
for sustaining a high-pressure economy, one close to capacity, may have increased.

5/20/97
Achieving maximum sustainable employment would ensure an environment that would
reduce the tensions and challenges associated with welfare reform and the associated
movement from welfare to work. Given the continued uncertainty about NAIRU, it has been
argued that this is an opportune time to experiment by allowing the unemployment rate to
decline further, even below the best guess of the current NAIRU, to ensure that we avoid
sacrificing any employment that could possibly be sustained without accelerating inflation.
I think these are provocative arguments for a reactive posture. They do not,
however, sway me from my preference for a cautiously preemptive stance. I am still aiming
to avoid overheating and sustain the expansion. I like my version of "C," but I can accept the
Chairman's version of "B," which I take to be a "go slow" strategy and not a retreat to a
reactive policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I agree that there are a lot of
similarities to the 1920s. I just do not want it to end the same way. [Laughter] I don't even
know what to call the next decade when the years after 2000 are counted in single digits.
Once we get to the teens, I'll be fine. But I expect to end my career in the next decade, and I
do not want it to be labeled "the great contraction." I see a growing chance that the 1990s
will be viewed at least as one of, if not the, most prosperous decade of the century. It will get
some label like the "soaring 1990s" or something like that. There are some scholars who say
that errors made starting in 1927 sowed the seeds for what happened in 1929 and afterward.
I find some of the analysis of what occurred and how it looked and felt in that period rather
compelling. I started my career in the Fed in 1967, a year in which some policy mistakes
were made. I was out of the System in 1977, another year in which policy mistakes started to

5/20/97
be made. I was not in the System in 1987; a lot of you were, but I remember very well what
kind of year that was. It is now 1997, and I think we need to be cautious about being too
shortsighted regarding how much momentum is built into the expansion. If the
productivity-supply side arguments are right about how much strength there is in the
economy, then it must be true, as it was in the 1920s, that real interest rates are quite a bit
higher than those we have gotten used to. I think that Al Broaddus's argument earlier and the
Chairman's remarks say that we have to accept the idea, and maybe try to sell the story to
some of our critics, that high real interest rates are a sign of a strong, healthy economy and
are not a bad thing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, like some others around the table, I would like to
move steadily and persistently toward price stability as measured somehow. This will
require some further tightening and I think the economy could absorb that tightening rather
well. However, it is also very apparent to me--I commented on this earlier--that this will
require a further debate, perhaps within this Committee but certainly with the public. We
will have to make a greater effort to educate the public before they will accept the need for
some further tightening of policy. For that reason, I would accept and support your
recommendation and encourage us to make a very conscientious effort to improve our public
educational activities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. This has been a tough meeting, Mr. Chairman, but I think a
very good one with a lot of constructive comments. Early in the meeting, Jerry Jordan

5/20/97
summed it up best for me when he said that the choice may well be between moving a little
now and moving a lot more later on. Let me make a couple of observations.
We all recognize that there are significant upside risks. To repeat what
everybody else has said, for me the key upside risk is that the expansion may not slow to
trend as projected. The problem is, of course, that we are not going to know this for sure. If
we find out that growth is well above trend at some point down the road, we could find
ourselves in a box with some very, very difficult choices. There has been a lot of focus on
uncertainty in the commentary around the table, and there certainly is a great deal of
uncertainty. I agree with Bill McDonough that greater uncertainty should induce greater
caution, but I think we need to be very careful not to let uncertainty paralyze us. I have been
attending these meetings off and on since 1973 and there is always a lot of uncertainty.
There may be a little more of it than the average at this meeting but in my experience not that
much more.
With respect to productivity, I am glad that you have highlighted it today, Mr.
Chairman. I think you are providing a very useful service not only to the Committee but to
the country in emphasizing that we may well be in the midst of a significant increase in trend
productivity growth. Again, as far as the short run is concerned, that does not necessarily
mean that nominal rates need to go up, but it certainly does imply that real rates need to
increase. That is another factor in my thinking.
As always, policy is a matter of balancing the risks. Let me tell you that I
recognize the risk in moving today. But I think there is also a substantial risk, in my view a
greater risk, if we do not move now. I would reiterate the point Tom Melzer made about our
longer-term goal of price stability. We certainly need to keep it in mind as we go forward.

5/20/97
Someone mentioned today that the core CPI is flat; actually the growth rate is flat but the
index itself is still moving up. We should not lose track of our longer-term goal. If we are
going to try to make progress toward that goal, this is a very good time to try to achieve it.
I think we need to move today. This is not the beginning of 1994. The funds rate
is already at 5-1/2 percent, so I am not saying we need to make a terribly robust move, but I
believe that a 1/4 percentage move would be appropriate today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, for me the policy choice comes down to assessing
alternative risks. It appears to me that the risk associated with raising the funds rate is
smaller than the risk of not raising it. If we tighten policy and that action turns out to have
been unnecessary, we would slow the expansion a bit, but there would be relatively little risk
of a prolonged period of weakness. If we do not raise the funds rate and the inflation rate
begins to show a clear upward trend, the long lags in policy mean that we could end up with
a problem on our hands.
On the basis of these considerations, I would prefer to raise the funds rate by 25
basis points at this meeting. However, since I do not see a possible pickup in inflation as
imminent, I am willing, somewhat reluctantly, to support a policy of no change in the funds
rate for the time being and asymmetric language even though I believe we are running the
risk of a larger rate increase later.
Finally, I very much look forward to our next meeting and the opportunity for us
to reconsider our decision not to change the rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.

5/20/97
MS. MINEHAN. I think my analysis is quite similar to Bob Parry's. We need to
assess both the risks that we face and the costs of being wrong in any action we take. I, too,
view staying put as a policy action.
As I noted earlier, the risks that growth will be more rapid and inflation more
difficult seem to me to continue to be strongly asymmetric. In fact, if I thought the
Greenbook forecast had a reasonable probability of being realized, I probably could live with
it. It is a forecast of a pretty good economic outcome. But I do not think it has a good
probability of coming about. In my view, some additional amount of tightening is necessary
to provide an extra source of constraint on the economy and keep it on a healthy track. Your
discussion of productivity was extremely interesting, Mr. Chairman, but in the end it seemed
to me that you had some sense of the potential need for tightening at some point this year.
What if we were to tighten now by 25 basis points and we were wrong and
everything started to come in at least as well as the Greenbook sees it, and maybe even a
little slower? Are the costs of being wrong in that way unacceptably high? I do not think so,
and one of the reasons has to do with the argument of the psychological impact on the
markets. I meet with a group of investment managers on a fairly regular basis. Their
discussions in recent weeks have continually focused on the availability of credit, the
liquidity of the markets, and the excesses that they see everywhere, particularly when it
comes to commercial real estate financing. Rather than feeding a sense of caution through
uncertainty about our actions, I think that not moving at this meeting or certainly not moving
soon will lead to a greater level of certainty among market participants that they can persist
in their excessive activities and that will feed into more speculation in the asset markets than
is healthy.

5/20/97
What if we stand pat and we are wrong? Of course, timing is everything and
perhaps it really doesn't matter whether we tighten now or in July or August or whenever we
meet during the rest of the year. I do think that in delaying we stand to lose a bit in the
markets, as I mentioned, and we also stand to lose the high ground of advocating a proactive
monetary policy. We need to reduce the risk of overshooting, and if we do not do it at a time
of fast growth and tight labor markets, when will we do it?
For what it's worth, the same group of investment managers spent a lot of their
time at our meeting discussing what they saw as the potential outside sources of resistance to
Fed moves, along the line of what Tom Hoenig was reflecting on in his comments earlier.
Their advice, again for what it's worth, is to do the right thing. For them, doing the right
thing is to tighten up a bit on the markets and rein in the potential for inflation to get out of
hand. I believe the right policy now is a further 25 basis point move. But again, timing is
everything. I think our current policy stance is not too far away from where it should be, Mr.
Chairman, and I could support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stem.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have to admit that I feel a little like
Dr. Watson to your Sherlock Holmes. You wove together all these strands and reconciled
the various puzzles that I have been worried about. Whatever else may be going on, we
know that as the period of economic growth has lengthened, gains in employment have
outpaced what would seem to be consistent with what demographic trends normally would
generate in terms of labor force growth and any reasonable long-term trend in participation
rates and hours worked. So, I am still a little cautious about where we are and how the
economy is performing.

5/20/97
I would add that I continue to agree with the basic concern that the risks here are
that demand will outpace supply and that we will experience a buildup of inflationary
pressures. I do not feel that it is absolutely urgent that we act on that concern at this meeting.
But having said that, I ran through the same chronology that Jerry Jordan referred to earlier
in the meeting and arrived at close to the same conclusion. That is, I think that if we delay
action now, we may not find ourselves confronting circumstances where we are convinced
and confident of the need for a policy tightening move and have a persuasive explanation
until perhaps November. Now, I do not know if waiting until November would turn out to be
a fatal error, but why find out? It does seem to me that circumstances today ought to
persuade us not to wait that long or run the risk of waiting that long. So, I would certainly
prefer a modest tightening now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. This decision comes down to balancing the need for more
insurance versus wait-and-see. I am more persuaded by the wait-and-see argument. There
is, as I look at it, more upside risk on the demand side in the future, but there is also upside
potential on the supply side, which we have consistently underestimated. If there is one
unifying theme that we pick up when we travel around our District, it is that there are
developments out there that really are enhancing productivity and working their way through
on the supply side. I think a proactive monetary policy has to take both the demand side and
the supply side into account. We want to see problems in a proactive sense, but we also need
to see benefits in a proactive sense. I think it is a reasonable bet to have that wait-and-see
attitude, particularly since current monetary policy is not loose. It is probably somewhat

5/20/97
restrictive, and I don't think we are that far behind the curve even if we are making a mistake
and should be tightening today. I am quite comfortable with the "B" asymmetric proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I had intended to say something much like what
President Boehne just said. Let me simply associate myself with his remarks and concur
with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I think the inflation risks are on the upside, as I
said before, and I believe it would be prudent to take out some additional insurance now in
the form of a 25 basis point increase in the federal funds rate. To reemphasize a point that
was made earlier--I know Al Broaddus made it and others probably did as well--we cannot
lose sight of how important our credibility is in assuring the kind of economic climate we
have enjoyed in recent years. The confidence that people have that we are going to keep
inflation low and stable is very important, and I see a move in the direction that I am
suggesting as consistent with maintaining that kind of credibility. As others have said, if we
are wrong and there are unique circumstances here that would not lead to an imminent
increase in the inflation rate, what would be so bad about moving the inflation rate lower?
We are not at price stability. We have some distance to go, and frankly I think exercising
monetary restraint at a time when the economy is strong is more likely to succeed in an
opportunistic sense than doing so in a recession or a recovery. This is what is implied by the
so-called opportunistic strategy. Even though people would associate me with the deliberate
approach, I think one could characterize a tightening move today as opportunistic.

5/20/97
Finally, I do not think that inaction on our part will do anything to stem
speculative behavior. If anything, inaction will foster such behavior.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.
MS. PHILLIPS. I could support "B" symmetric or asymmetric. I do not have
strong feelings on the symmetry question because if we were to move in the intermeeting
period, I think there would be some kind of consultation. I do think that tightening is
eventually going to be needed, but since inflation has been rather benign recently, it seems to
me that there is room to wait a bit longer. As I said last time, I am not sure that a federal
funds rate of 5-1/2 percent is that far out of alignment, particularly if we get a slowdown in
the expansion or if productivity has moved us to a higher growth potential. It does seem to
me that we have some time to let things play out a bit more, and I think it would be best to
conserve our monetary tools for now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a preference for an additional
point tightening, but I can support your recommendation for today. In any event, I certainly
would support an asymmetrical directive. In view of the hour, I will not repeat all the
arguments. The possible payback of staying ahead of inflationary pressures that many of us
think are probably building weighed against the very small downside risk of a modest
tightening in a fully employed, solid economy leads me to conclude that a somewhat less
accommodative policy would be both reasonable and explainable.
I would like to add, as we talk about policy options, that we always seem to be
constrained by insufficient focus on the longer run. Without a better defined and better
articulated goal, whatever we decide that goal needs to be, each meeting becomes an exercise

1/4

5/20/97
in judging the latest data in the context of a short-term forecast. While I would not want to
give up our individual and collective judgments, especially in a period of fundamental
changes in the way the economy may be working, our current approach to policy without a
clearly understood anchor makes it very difficult to build the kind of understanding and
support for policies that promise long-term gains but entail short-term costs. I hope we can
get back to that debate in July or sometime soon. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, our outlook for the economy in 1997 is very
similar to the Greenbook forecast, but we are a little more optimistic on inflation. However,
we are assuming a slightly higher federal funds rate through the end of the year than does the
Greenbook in its baseline forecast. I am very pleased that you raised the productivity point
today because it is something that we have been talking about at our Bank, and I think it
deserves a great deal more attention. If we look at the productivity improvement in the first
quarter, which we did not talk very much about today, and if that is not the result of a
structural change as you are suggesting in your hypothesis, it follows that the current high
output levels are being achieved at very high resource utilization rates. Obviously, in this
situation we will have an output gap that will open up further, and inflation almost certainly
will accelerate. I very much hope that a structural change is occurring as you are
hypothesizing. Any additional data or information that we can gather to get a better
understanding of this will be of great help to us in our formulation of monetary policy. But
regardless of whether this is a structural change or not, I think the risks clearly are on the
upside, as we have all mentioned. We have to keep in mind the uncertainty that is caused by
the methodological changes that are now being made in the consumer price index. We have

5/20/97
to keep adjusting our thinking to these slight methodological improvements of .1 percent a
year that we are getting in measured inflation.
Although I, too, see a need for further tightening this year, I can accept your
recommendation today for the "B" asymmetric directive. I do want to add one point, though.
You will recall that at the March meeting we adopted a symmetric directive that will become
public information on Thursday of this week. I think it is going to be important in your
speeches and comments in the coming weeks and months that you once again prepare the
market for what you said was a high probability of a tightening move--you indicated a 50/50
probability for July and a very high probability for August--because I think there is likely to
be some confusion when that symmetric directive becomes public knowledge later this week.
I think you carried out this educational effort very effectively earlier in the year, and I am
sure you can do it equally effectively now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. I support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you read the directive that would encompass
"B" asymmetric?
MR. BERNARD. I will be reading from page 13 in the Bluebook. There are
several charts that come before it, so when you get to page 12 you will have to go several
more pages. "In the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and
giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, somewhat
greater reserve restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the

5/20/97
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
some moderation in the expansion of M2 and M3 over coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.
MR. BERNARD:
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Broaddus
President Guynn
Governor Kelley
Governor Meyer
President Moskow
President Parry
Governor Phillips
Governor Rivlin

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our next meeting is July 1 and 2. Let's go to lunch.
END OF MEETING

