Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
March 25, 1997

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, March
25, 1997, at 9:00 a.m.

PRESENT:

Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Guynn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Meyer
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Rivlin
Messrs. Hoenig, Jordan, Melzer, and Ms. Minehan, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist
Messrs. Eisenbeis, Goodfriend, Hunter, Lindsey, Mishkin,
Siegman, and Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Winn, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors

3/25/97
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Madigan and Simpson, Associate Directors, Divisions of
Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics respectively,
Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Dewald, Hakkio, Lang, Rolnick, and Rosenblum,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St.
Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas
respectively
Messrs. Altig, Bentley, Judd, and Kopcke, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, New York, San
Francisco, and Boston respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
March 25, 1997

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Is Mike Prell coming?
MR. STOCKTON. Mike is arriving for a just-in-time briefing, Mr. Chairman.

[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would someone like to approve the minutes of the
February 4-5 meeting?
SPEAKER(?). So move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Mr. Fisher, you are on.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Before I ask a question, I have a hypothesis. It is
conceivable that the 1982 report on System holdings of individual securities slipped between
the drawer and the bottom of somebody's desk and that created a precedent. [Laughter]
Therefore, the data were not published in 1982 and it was presumed that they should not be
thereafter. I say that only half tongue in cheek.
Questions for Peter? Starting with his second request, is there any objection to
including the detailed portfolio information in the annual report? If not, we will assume that
it is acceptable, and we need a vote on domestic operations.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We also need a vote on the
intermeeting leeway.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Move approval of the additional leeway to

$12 billion.

3/25/97
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been moved. Is there a second?
MR. KELLEY. Second.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a second. Without objection. Thank you
all. Let's move on with record speed to Mr. Prell.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mike?
MR. PARRY. Mike, I was a little uncertain as to the wealth effects on consumer
spending in the Greenbook forecast. I had the impression that there certainly was an impact
from higher equity prices in particular, but in the Monday staff briefing to the Board, you
seemed to be saying that there was not much of an effect. Would you go into that a little,
please?
MR. PRELL. On our interpretation, there probably has been some positive effect
on consumption over the past year or so from the increase in financial wealth. Setting aside
measurement problems, that effect likely has in reality been offset at least to some degree by
an increased propensity to save based on concerns about retirement income and for other
precautionary reasons. Going forward, we would interpret our forecast as continuing to
incorporate some positive wealth effect, but again with these other factors tending to balance
that. Because we have assumed that the stock market tops out as we move into the latter part
of this year and then declines noticeably in 1998, the wealth-to-income ratio falls back a
considerable distance toward where it was several years ago. That tends to diminish the
wealth effect as we move out in 1998. Another factor to keep in mind is that we have had a
surge in income growth over the past year or so. It would be natural, given a permanent
income view, for spending to lag a bit and for the saving rate, all other things equal, to edge

3/25/97
up a bit. As income decelerates over the next year or so, we might still be getting some
adjustment in consumption that would then tend to result in the saving rate edging lower. So,
we see a number of counteracting forces that we have tried, at least judgmentally, to balance
in a sensible way in the forecast.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I noticed that you built into your forecast for 1998 an increase of
75 to 100 basis points in the federal funds rate.
MR. PRELL. 75 basis points.
MS. MINEHAN. I gather from the wording of the Greenbook and your briefing
that that was basically to keep real interest rates stable. But I wondered why you were doing
that. At least in my memory, it was a change from earlier Greenbook practices, and I would
find it helpful to have your comments on this. Of course, we can see in your alternative
projections what the effects are if you do not change the federal funds rate assumption.
MR. PRELL. We felt quite uneasy about what kind of message the forecast would
convey had we retained the assumption of a flat nominal funds rate. We perceived that the
underlying strength of demand has been greater than we expected. Extrapolating that to
some degree, it exacerbates what we already saw as a fundamental instability. I think this
was highlighted in some of the longer-run simulations in the last Bluebook, where we
stretched the projections out a bit. Perhaps it became clearer to you there that what we
foresaw with unchanged nominal interest rates was in essence a path where resource
utilization was going to continue to be well above sustainable levels. Following up on that
analysis, we thought that the assumed uptilt in the funds rate would be a natural way to

3/25/97
indicate that at some point nominal interest rates probably would have to rise to avoid
excessive stimulus. We built in something that is on a par with what is happening to the core
CPI and to some of the broader GDP-related price measures.
MS. MINEHAN. I certainly do not object to that approach as a forecast. It clearly
is in line with a lot of major forecasts. But I thought the whole point of doing the
Greenbook, at least the way we have been doing it, was to have something that shows what
happens if we do not change anything.
MR. PRELL. For all practical purposes the assumed rise in the funds rate is
tantamount in terms of the economic outcome to your not doing anything over the period
1997 and 1998.
MS. MINEHAN. True.
MR. PRELL. But I thought it might be a useful signal here of what we now
perceive to be the longer-term unsustainability of the scenario that we have been drawing in
prior Greenbooks.
MS. MINEHAN. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. I think it was useful to get those alternatives, but which of the
alternatives do you think would be most closely aligned with an opportunistic approach?
MR. PRELL. I guess it is a matter of interpretation as to what the opportunistic
approach entails. If it entails making sure that the inflation rate does not move above the
recent range, then our forecast implies that a policy move is necessary at some point.
Whether that means a relatively aggressive approach or something that involves a continued
"wait and see" stance and moving later, I don't think we can readily discern. But the fact is

3/25/97
that our forecast does imply that, in an underlying sense, consumer price inflation is moving
above the 3 percent mark in 1998. If you view that as a ceiling in the range of acceptable
outcomes and the point where you want to apply the brakes, then I suppose you could argue
that a more aggressive approach than that associated with our baseline forecast is the one that
is consistent with opportunism. But that is in the eye of the beholder. I do not think we can
define its application that precisely.
MR. MOSKOW. Mike, if you look back at your forecasts of last summer, you
were projecting much lower growth than occurred at the end of 1996 and that you now
anticipate through 1997. When you made your comments this morning, I think you used the
phrase "entering a boom at this point." I was just wondering if you could step back and
explain what has happened here. Why are you now expecting a boom or "maybe" a boom?
What has changed in this period?
MR. PRELL. The "maybe" is an important qualifier. That is not our baseline
forecast, but again these are matters of definition. We do have a forecast that, given current
money market conditions, now sees the most likely outcome as above-trend growth for an
extended period and an unemployment rate that falls to 5 percent or less. In some sense, you
could regard that as boom conditions even without going to the more dramatic, stronger
growth scenario that I suggested was a risk. Why has this occurred? I think we consistently
said that we did not see the stimulus that would maintain above-trend growth, so we kept
forecasting that growth was going to fall back to something like trend for lack of a
compelling reason that it should not.
What has happened? That is very hard to sort out. If we look at consumer
behavior, for example, we have not had a drop in the saving rate. It is true that the stock

3/25/97
market has been much stronger than we anticipated. We have had a tremendous increase in
financial wealth that either has reflected or supported a tremendous surge in consumer
sentiment. We are at very high levels of consumer confidence according to the Michigan or
the Conference Board surveys. The current Michigan index is the highest since 1965, and in
only a few months in the history of that index have there been numbers this high. I think
there is at this point some buoyancy in consumer demand beyond what we would have
anticipated. We see very lean inventories. We continue to be surprised on the upside by the
strength in computer investment; we have had some very strong numbers. We seem to be
getting a more solid performance in nonresidential construction than we anticipated. You
will recall that we were somewhat puzzled by weak contracts data through much of last year,
but they tended to catch up with an enormous burst in the fourth quarter. All the anecdotal
evidence suggests there is more momentum in that sector than was apparent six months ago,
and that has multiplier effects. The upside surprise seems to be a collection of things that
have supplied a considerable lift to economic activity. At this point, while we are still
somewhat in the spirit of saying that economic growth probably will move back toward
trend, we see an economy that seems to have considerable momentum, and we are not
optimistic that the moderation in growth is going to occur overnight. Basically, one of the
things we learned was that financial conditions were not imposing as much restraint on the
economy as we thought they would.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike? If not, who would
like to start the roundtable? President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, the Fifth District economy continues a healthy
advance. Labor markets remain exceedingly tight throughout most of the District, especially

3/25/97
in some of the booming areas of the southern part of the District in the Carolinas along
Interstate 85. Wages for skilled labor in that part of our District have been moving up
gradually for some time. We now hear more reports of pay increases for unskilled workers.
In Charlotte, for example, hourly pay for entry-level unskilled workers has risen about a
dollar over the last year to a range of 7 to 8 dollars on average currently. Elsewhere, both
residential and commercial real estate and construction activity are rising sharply. On the
commercial side in particular, we see very low vacancy rates and rising rents in some areas.
That is especially the case in suburban areas, but to some extent we see it in central city areas
as well. Most of the other anecdotal information we have received recently is consistent with
what appears to be happening in other parts of the country. Consumer spending clearly
seems to have accelerated in recent weeks. With respect to prices, although labor and other
costs are rising, there is relatively little talk of imminent price increases in most of the
comments that we hear. Indeed, at their last meeting, several of our directors went out of
their way to say that there was a general absence of pricing power in most markets with
which they were familiar.
There are nonetheless a few straws in the wind. One director mentioned that
recent increases in trucking fees were beginning to stick for the first time in a while.
who runs a large farm equipment dealership told me
that his major supplier, John Deere, is no longer guaranteeing prices for items that will be
delivered later in the year. But those types of comments are still the exception rather than the
rule.
Turning to the national picture, it is hard, for me at least, not to be impressed by
the current across-the-board momentum in the economy. As you already mentioned this

3/25/97
morning, Mike, and as the Greenbook points out, the Michigan Consumer Confidence Index
is now at its highest level since 1965. That started me thinking a little about 1965; it was a
good year for the economy. At the time, Arthur Okun described the situation as "the
promised land of 4 percent unemployment with no compelling evidence of accelerating
wages and prices or stress in financial markets." In hindsight, of course, we know that 1965
was the year in which inflation really began to take off. The inflation rate was below 2
percent in 1965; it rose to over 3 percent in 1966 and subsequently to over 6 percent by the
end of the decade.
Obviously, there are significant differences between 1965 and 1997, not the least
of which is our greater commitment, I believe, to contain inflation and resist inflationary
pressures and the greater credibility that goes along with it. But I think there also are some
striking parallels between the situation in 1965, at least early in that year, and what we are
facing now. As in 1965, the economy is now operating at a very high level and it strikes me
as being quite vulnerable to upside shocks. In the 1960s, of course, the shock ultimately took
the form of the Vietnam military buildup. The most likely shock, if that is the right word, in
1997 would be a more subtle process. It would involve a kind of circular process where
increased spending generates increases in jobs, which generate increases in income, which
encourage further spending, and so forth. I think a key feature of policy in 1965 was that the
magnitude of the upside risk was not appreciated by the policymaking establishment as a
whole as we went into that year. In the current situation, I worry that the public, as
represented by the industrialist who sat next to Mike Prell, does not adequately appreciate the
extent of the current upside risk, mainly because of the damping effect of three temporary
factors on wage and price behavior. These are: the job insecurity that the Chairman has

3/25/97
emphasized in his recent public comments, increased labor force participation, which always
occurs at this point of the cyclical expansion but which I think is greater now than is
normally the case, and the strong dollar.
Let me make just a quick comment on each of those. As you said, Mr. Chairman,
once the downward adjustment of real wages to the increase in job insecurity is complete, we
would expect the usual impact of tight labor markets on wages to reassert itself.
Furthermore, if labor markets remain as tight as they are now for any extended period in the
future, at some point workers are not going to feel insecure any longer. When that happens,
we could see the usual short-run Phillips-curve effect reassert itself just as the restraining
impact of job insecurity begins to unwind. We will then have two forces working on the cost
side and a considerable upside risk from that direction. Similarly, tight labor markets
encourage greater labor force participation because job search costs are lower and wages are
higher. Sooner or later, that effect will dissipate even if demand remains strong. Here again,
greater labor force participation can only delay the emergence of inflationary pressures, not
prevent them. Finally, the restraint from foreign competition on U.S. inflation can work
only so long as the dollar remains strong and does not depreciate significantly. This, of
course, turns on the ability of the United States to continue to attract capital inflows. I think
we have been lucky on this front over the course of the last several quarters in that our
economy has been quite strong compared to the economies of other major industrial nations.
Obviously, that situation could change. If growth in Japan and Europe were to begin to
accelerate, we could have some weakening of the dollar.
The bottom line as I see it, Mr. Chairman, is that I do not think the foundation for
our favorable macroeconomic performance is very solid or secure at this stage. We need to

3/25/97
do all we can with monetary policy to reinforce that performance. I think we have been
pushing our luck with monetary policy in recent months. We could do this because we had
built a lot of credibility in 1994, but I would not want to see us push our luck much further.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a wide range of opinions in the way our
society is looking at this inflation phenomenon. I don't remember it ever being so broad. I
am not talking about the uninformed; I am talking about people who are participating in the
system. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you. Regarding the Cleveland District first, both bankers
and a retail executive for a national firm

expressed their concerns

about the construction of additional retail space. There is
already excess space as far as they are concerned. Store closings are starting to occur, yet
new construction is being planned and put into place. One of the bankers said that lending
standards relating to the construction of commercial real estate have disappeared in the last
couple of months. He hears of lending agreements with no takeouts being arranged, no
permanent financing being locked up, no tenants being signed, and he is finding it
increasingly difficult to rein in his own people and have them turn down applications for
such construction loans. Also, he thinks extensions of C&I loans, which have been very
strong throughout the region, may be increasing further. Interest margins have continued to
erode. On the noninterest expense side, it is a mixed story. Several directors, bankers and
non-bankers, talked about how their telephone expense has dropped dramatically. A banker
said his overall telephone expense--

--is down 25 percent from a year

ago, but his software costs are skyrocketing. On balance, he has not seen much benefit.

3/25/97
from the retail sector said that even though January and February
sales came in a lot better than expected both nationally and in the region, he still thinks that
growth in retail spending over the next few years is going to average only about 3 percent
versus 5 percent so far in the 1990s. So, he is pessimistic regarding the sustainability of the
kind of retail spending we have seen. In the steel industry,

from a very large

company said that he had his people do some research on productivity in 1996 versus 1993.
Over the three-year period, they had an increase of 27 percent in productivity, and without
that his company would not have been able to sustain its earnings because they have not been
able to adjust their prices so far. He said that steel imports were flooding in. In the fourth
quarter such imports were 25 percent above a year earlier. He sees downward pressure on
steel prices, but then, oddly, he said that he took advantage of a current situation in the
marketplace to put in a 3 percent price increase on 30 percent of his volume. I asked if he
thought the increase would stick, and he replied that,
he personally did not think it would. Some on his top
management team thought that current market conditions presented an opportunity and that
he had an obligation to try to find out if the market would support the price increase. I found
interesting this shift in attitudes and willingness to test the receptivity of the market to higher
prices.
Another interesting development in my view relates to the newsprint side of the
newspaper industry. You will recall that a year and a half ago newsprint prices were
skyrocketing, and a lot of companies put through price increases for home delivery and at the
newsstand. Now, in an environment where newsprint prices are plunging, I asked what
newspaper executives were doing about pricing. I was told that the savings were all going to

3/25/97
the advertisers. Price competition there was intense and the volume of ad space was up
sharply, but the price of ad space was substantially below where it was a year ago--an
indirect effect of how the marketplace works.
On the labor side, construction unions are expecting a 4 percent average yearly
increase over the next three years. They think their contract will be agreed to by May and
that the increase will be higher than it was in the contract for the three-year period currently
ending. An interesting twist in the press about plant closings is that the Ford Motor
Company announced that they were going to shut down their Lorain, Ohio, operation and
terminate the jobs of some 1,800 people. The news stories have said that these workers were
not going to provide much relief to the tight labor markets in the area. That's because these
people will collect 95 percent of a very high wage for a year and they have the wrong set of
skills for other employers. One press report also said that auto industry workers had the
wrong work ethic for what was needed by small manufacturing firms.
Let me turn to the national economy. I want to put a different twist on the notion
of an opportunistic policy. We are experiencing a favorable productivity surprise. We do
not know its precise dimensions, but a lot of the anecdotal reports that we hear certainly
suggest that it is occurring. In some circumstances, we would expect prices to decline. If we
were in a stable price environment--whether it is a gold standard environment or a stable fiat
currency regime--and we had a favorable productivity surprise, we would expect the benefits
of that wealth gain to show up in higher standards of living by way of lower prices. In an
inflation-prone environment, we would expect a lower rate of inflation. There is nothing in
the mechanism of the way individual firms operate that would by itself suggest to me higher
total nominal spending. I think the connection between what we see at the micro level and

3/25/97
the macro level needs unraveling, when we look at projections like those in the Greenbook
that show an acceleration in nominal spending growth and in total demand for output.
We would expect a favorable productivity surprise, other things the same, to
translate into higher real interest rates. In a stable price environment where there is no
discrepancy between nominal interest rates and real interest rates, the level of interest rates
would shift up. In a fiat money world, if monetary policy failed to recognize the changes in
the equilibrium situation and did not adjust nominal interest rates higher, then effectively, to
use the language we normally employ, we would have eased monetary policy even if we
maintained the same level of nominal interest rates. In my framework, we would see an
acceleration in money growth, and that would accommodate, as in the Greenbook
presentation, an acceleration of nominal spending growth. The second difference would go
up. But we know that the second difference has to come back down if we are going to
prevent an acceleration in the rate of inflation when that favorable productivity surprise
begins to dissipate. One thing we do not want to do is to accommodate an acceleration of
nominal spending like the one that happened in the 1960s, and I think that was a very large
part of the story at the time.
It has been disturbing for me to see that growth in both narrow and broad money
measures in virtually every major country in the world has accelerated in the last 4 to 6
months. Growth in some measures, including high-powered money, has risen into the
double-digit range. A sharp acceleration has occurred in Japan, Canada, and countries
throughout Europe. Now, it may be that the world is experiencing a productivity surprise
and a global post-Berlin-Wall marketplace surprise, but overall that should result in higher
real interest rates, not in higher rates of inflation. It does seem to me that our economic

3/25/97
analysis would lead us in the direction of saying that we have to guard against passively and
unintentionally accommodating an acceleration of nominal income growth.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth District economy continues
to grow at a robust pace. As reported by our directors and other business contacts, growth is
strong across the board in all District states and in just about all industries. Our
manufacturing survey suggests that firms continue to project strong production activity as
they look forward. For example, one of the high-tech firms, Sun Microsystems, announced
plans to build a one million square foot plant in Denver and to add between three and four
thousand employees. Reinforcing some of this anecdotal evidence, we know that District
employment growth in the last year has been somewhat higher than that for the nation as a
whole. We know that bank credit has been growing in our region; it has been down more
recently, but that is seasonal. The farm economy and the energy economy in the District are
both in good shape for now. One crop, winter wheat, never has been in better shape in most
people's memory, so there should be an excellent harvest this year, assuming the weather
cooperates. In the drilling area, activity is very high, higher than a year ago, and even though
both oil and gas prices have slipped somewhat, our producers remain profitable. Retail
prices generally are holding steady, but wage pressures are continuing to rise. Most of our
directors and other contacts describe our labor market as tight, and this includes both our
smaller manufacturers and some of the larger firms, such as Boeing and Eastman Kodak, that
have operations in the District.
Nationally, I think the best way for me to describe our outlook is to say that we are
basically in agreement with the direction of the Greenbook forecast, though we do not see as

3/25/97
much strength in some of the components. But in terms of where we see real growth,
nominal growth, employment levels, and inflation, we are fundamentally in agreement. I
will not comment more specifically other than to note our concerns about the inflation
outlook as presented in the Greenbook and in our own projections.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, strong growth has continued in the Twelfth District
in recent months following large gains last year. Although severe winter weather slightly
disrupted economic activity in January, we have seen indications of a large bounceback since
then. In 1996, District payrolls expanded by about 3-1/2 percent. Employment growth in
the fastest growing states--Nevada, Arizona, and Utah--currently is averaging between 4-1/2
and 7-1/2 percent. I might note parenthetically that Utah is perhaps the state with the tightest
labor conditions in the entire nation; its unemployment rate is 3.2 percent. I would also note
that if one wants to find slack labor conditions, I would like to recommend Alaska and
Hawaii, which were 49th and 50th in terms of employment growth, and you could also
choose a broad spectrum of weather as well. [Laughter]
Revised data indicate that California's recovery accelerated throughout 1996.
California payroll employment grew by 3 percent last year, well above the 2.3 percent rate
recorded in 1995. The rate of growth picked up in most areas of California last year, and
although severe winter weather held down employment in January, the February numbers
showed another large job gain. The fastest growing sectors in California are high-tech
manufacturing, business services, and engineering management services, although other
sectors such as construction, trade, and real estate are growing steadily.

3/25/97
Turning to the national economy, the concerns I had in February about the
inflation outlook have been intensified by recent developments. Real GDP growth appears to
have turned in another strong performance this quarter following a rapid advance in the
fourth quarter. The economy's surge in recent quarters means that it is operating at a
noticeably higher level than seemed likely only a few months ago. While judging resource
utilization is difficult, the unemployment and the capacity utilization rates as well as
estimates of the GDP gap taken together suggest that excess demand pressures most likely
are building in the economy. A number of factors, including the high dollar and tight fiscal
policy, seem likely to slow growth later this year. However, I do not think the basic problem
of excess demand for resources is likely to be solved anytime soon with an unchanged funds
rate. Therefore, I see a significant risk of an increase in underlying inflation in the years
ahead. I emphasize the word "risk" because we have not actually seen signs of rising
inflation in the data. This fact obviously raises uncertainty about the future. For example, it
is difficult to judge the magnitude of possible roles for enhanced productivity and for
changes in the labor market in holding down inflation. However, given the long lags in
monetary policy, we are left, I believe, with little choice but to use forecasts in gauging
policy. My best judgment at this point is that even with the measurement improvements
being introduced by the BLS, the core CPI would still show a modest upward trend this year
and next if monetary policy remains unchanged. Our forecast shows core CPI inflation of
around 2-3/4 percent in 1997 and 3 percent in 1998 compared to just 2-1/2 percent last year.
I do not think we should risk an upward trend in inflation because, if it becomes established,
it would be costly to turn around. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.

3/25/97
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, the Seventh District economy continues to
expand at a modest rate that is somewhat slower than the nation's but its growth is consistent
with a regional economy that is at full resource utilization. However, activity in a number of
sectors has been stronger than expected so far in 1997. For example, both the light vehicle
and steel industries have been doing better than anticipated. Production of light vehicles and
steel rebounded in the first quarter following declines related to the strike in the fourth
quarter. On the demand side, light vehicle sales were stronger than expected in the first
quarter, although the Big Three lost market share to foreign nameplates. Orders for steel
have remained strong. Incentives have been an important factor supporting light vehicle
sales, which appear to be continuing in March at the higher-than-expected rate of 15-1/4
million units that we saw in January and February. In contrast to these price concessions,
several steel producers announced price increases, as Jerry Jordan mentioned before. Our
contacts are saying that these increases have about a 50/50 chance of sticking at this point.
Steel imports remain high and four new domestic plants will come on stream in the next five
months. They will add about 3 to 4 percent to steel capacity in the United States this year.
Of course, we do not know if any other plants will be closed as these new plants are
activated. Adjusting as best we can for the weather, housing activity seems to have been
slightly stronger than in the nation. A large national retailer reported that sales in March
continued in line with recent gains on a year-over-year basis.
District labor markets are still very tight. The unemployment rate for District
states edged lower in January and averaged 4.3 percent in early March. Initial state
unemployment insurance claims were still running well below a year ago. Payroll
employment growth in our District is lagging the nation, and contacts indicate that labor

3/25/97
shortages are constraining both employment and output growth. Our small business, labor,
and agricultural advisory council met last Friday, and the members almost unanimously
reaffirmed the difficulty of finding qualified workers. A representative of the temporary help
industry mentioned that computer programmers are in extremely short supply, and
programmers who know any of the older languages such as COBOL that are needed to deal
with the year 2000 conversion problem are receiving significant premiums of up to 50
percent over what programmers would normally be getting. In addition to the usual reasons
cited as to why wages more generally have not accelerated significantly, a representative of
the United Automobile Workers noted that dramatic increases in gain sharing, tied to either
productivity or profits, were significant for her union negotiations.
Turning to agriculture, Taiwan recently announced that they were halting all pork
exports because of an outbreak of foot and mouth disease. Some 17 percent of all pork
consumed in Japan is imported from Taiwan, and U.S. exporters are now expected to fill a
large share of this gap. U.S. hog prices have increased sharply since the Taiwan
announcement of the ban last week, and with little or no growth projected in U.S. pork
production, this is likely to put more pressure on meat prices this year.
We have received an advance copy of the Chicago Purchasing Manager's survey
for March, which is confidential until it is released next Monday, March 31. The overall
index for our area shows a slight acceleration in the rate of expansion, up from 56.2 in
February to 57.5 in March, with new orders and production both rising more rapidly. The
inflation measures were mixed; the prices-paid component moved further above 50, while the
supplier-deliveries component dropped sharply to below 50.

3/25/97
Turning to the national outlook, our assessment of the economy has changed
somewhat since the February meeting. We still anticipate that real growth will decelerate
somewhat by the second half of this year to a pace slightly above trend or at trend. But we
no longer believe that current conditions in the economy are such as to guarantee that
deceleration. Our growth forecast is now conditioned on a higher funds rate path than it was
in February. We continue to see a risk that demand pressures will outstrip the growth of
productive capacity. The strength of demand has been surprising most of us since at least
last summer. Given the maturity of the expansion, one would not expect demand to be
growing so quickly without some stimulus. It is, of course, difficult to know for sure, but
that stimulus may stem from a monetary policy that is more expansionary than we had
thought. After all, given what we know about the lags associated with monetary policy, the
timing of the pickup in demand corresponds roughly to the expected effects of the actions
that we took a little over a year ago. Those actions made sense at the time as insurance
against what might have been an overly weak trend in demand, but clearly conditions have
changed and weak demand is no longer a concern.
Finally, on the puzzle of why we have not yet seen appreciable wage or price
pressures, I believe the Chairman's discussion of worker insecurity provides a useful insight.
As job insecurity, rising labor force participation rates, and other temporary damping forces
wane, the balance of risks tilts more clearly to the upside. In sum, I agree with the overall
picture of the economy depicted in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, the New England economy remains quite
healthy. In fact, it is healthier than we thought it was. As I reported before, we had been

3/25/97
tracking regional employment growth at about half the national pace. The spring benchmark
revisions to the employment data showed that, in fact, jobs were expanding at just about the
national pace or about double the rate that we had been seeing earlier. New Hampshire and
Massachusetts are exhibiting the strongest growth; Maine, Vermont, and Rhode Island are on
the low side, and even Connecticut is showing surprising strength. The region's jobless rate
fell to 4.2 percent in February, more than a percentage point below the national rate. The
rates in all six states were below the national average in January, with rates in Vermont and
New Hampshire well below in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range.
The labor market continues to be tight for selected job categories, but the
definition of "selected" seems to be broadening a bit. More individual occupations or job
types are being mentioned as hard to fill than in previous periods. Some retailers indicate
they are experiencing recruiting difficulties even at the low end of the job skills spectrum,
and temporary employment firms report both increased difficulty meeting demand and rising
wages across the board. Anecdotally, I am told that an employer no longer interviews
prospective employees in the data communications field; the prospective employees
interview the employer, and some will not even show up in person for an interview unless the
answers to their questions over the telephone are responsive to their concerns. Those
concerns are not just about money--they include money, to be sure--but more often than not,
these technicians want to be assured of being involved in high-tech, cutting-edge projects so
that their skills will continue to be marketable. Contacts also note that their firms are using
signing bonuses and stock options to attract scarce skilled staff but that those practices are
not yet leading to across-the-board wage increases. Rather, employees with specific skills
are being paid more, while other employees with less marketable qualifications "enjoy"

3/25/97
much smaller pay increases. Thus, overall wages are rising a bit more slowly in the New
England area than in the nation, and we continue to hear that price increases are difficult, if
not impossible, to make stick.
I have reported in the past on the pickup in nonresidential construction and the
prospects for more nonresidential building, particularly in the eastern Massachusetts area.
Housing markets also are enjoying a good bit of strength. Realtors region-wide have said
that activity is picking up either in terms of actual home sales or the number of inquiries from
potential buyers. Massachusetts stands out with reports that 1996 broke the previous record,
set unfortunately in 1987, for the number of residential real estate sales in a calendar year.
But contacts say all the New England states are seeing improvement. Prices are rising in
response, modestly as yet, and new housing construction has picked up.
Turning to the national scene, we are in general agreement with the Greenbook
that the near-term outlook for GDP growth is stronger than we might have expected earlier
this year and the risks associated with inflationary growth are a bit higher. Arguably at least,
the Greenbook overstates a little the strength of the prospective expansion, and the external
sector especially could exert a stronger drag than is projected by the staff. In addition, our
estimate of potential is a bit higher, so we do not expect unemployment to drop below 5
percent as does the Greenbook. But all of this falls by and large into the category of "nit
picking." The potential for robust, above-potential growth led by consumption seems clear,
as are the asymmetric risks that capacity constraints will begin to bind sooner rather than
later. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I used to write COBOL. Maybe I could go into
business. Perhaps I should make a few telephone calls! [Laughter]

3/25/97

MS. MINEHAN. Right. You have to find all the programs where only two digits
are embedded instead of four.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, the Second District
economy has shown continued signs of strength in the first quarter. Payroll job creation
remains sturdy, and job growth was revised up a bit for 1996 and early 1997. New York
State's unemployment rate was stable, while New Jersey's fell to a six-year low. Benchmark
revisions to 1996 unemployment rates were minimal, though both civilian employment and
labor force participation were revised up substantially. Retail sales generally were above
plan, boosted in part by New York State's one-week tax abatement on clothing in January
and by unseasonably mild weather in February. Consumer confidence in the Middle Atlantic
region surged to a new cyclical high in the first quarter, but it remains below the national
average. Residential and commercial real estate markets continued to gain momentum early
this year; single-family home sales improved, and permits to build apartments remained on
an uptrend. In some of the region's tighter office markets, falling vacancy rates have begun
to push up asking rents. Regional surveys of purchasing managers were mixed in February,
but they generally signaled improvement in the manufacturing sector. In New York and
northeastern New Jersey, consumer price inflation averaged 2.7 percent in the twelve months
ending in February, down from 2.9 percent in 1996 and just below the national rate of 3
percent. Local banks have reported little change in loan demand and only a slight rise in
consumer delinquency rates.
On the national level, since our last forecast in late January, indicators of domestic
demand, labor markets, and production have come in surprisingly strong. However, the

3/25/97
international trade data for January were much weaker than we expected. On balance, we
have boosted our growth forecast for this quarter to 2-1/2 percent and for 1997 as a whole to
near 2-1/4 percent. We do not have quite the robust growth that the Greenbook does for
1998; we have it at 2 percent, but we do believe that the upside risks are substantial. Under
our scenario, the unemployment rate declines to between 5 and 5-1/4 percent by the end of
this year and stays around that range for 1998. Despite the continued strength of real
economic activity, core consumer price inflation has decelerated further in the current
quarter, and the rate of increase in aggregate labor compensation is running well below that
predicted by traditional Phillips curve models. Nonetheless, given the current and expected
levels of resource utilization, we believe that acceleration of core inflation over the forecast
horizon is the most likely outcome. Indeed, while we have pushed the starting point of that
acceleration further out in the future, we have raised the rate of core inflation expected to be
reached in 1998 to 3.3 percent on a Q4 to Q4 basis.
There are three developments since our last meeting that have raised my staffs
and my own concern about inflation considerably above the already increasing level of
anxiety that I expressed at our last meeting. First, the levels of consumer spending, consumer
confidence, and residential construction are so high that I believe the always hard to predict
wealth effect is kicking in and is likely to remain engaged even if there should be a modest
stock market correction. Second, business fixed investment seems unusually robust for this
late stage of the business cycle, and it shows up in areas such as heavy truck orders and
investment in structures that make me believe that the business executive will be joining the
consumer in increasing demand. Third, we have benefited for several years from a positive
supply shock in the form of slower increases in health benefit costs than in wages that has

3/25/97
produced an acceptable slope to the rise in the ECI. Our sources of expertise--on both the
supply and demand sides of health care and for both goods and services--believe that positive
period is behind us and that increases in health care costs will track the rise in the CPI in the
future. They, and we, are not predicting a negative supply shock but the end of the positive
shock. That combination of developments makes me believe that the risk of rising inflation
next year and in 1999 has become significantly higher since our last meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, am an old COBOL programmer.
If you go into business, I hope you will give me a call; I would love to be your partner.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We will increase Federal Reserve earnings!
MR. GUYNN. The economic picture that emerges in the Southeast has many
parallels to what is going on nationally. At the same time, as I reported at the last meeting,
the overall rate of economic expansion in our region has settled back somewhat from what it
was earlier in the expansion. When I talk about some slowing, it is from relatively high rates
of economic growth. As elsewhere in the country, retail sales in our area were stronger than
expected during the mid-winter period. Retailers are optimistic going forward to Easter, and
inventories seem about right to them. We are seeing some signs of a slowdown in real estate,
both residential and commercial. Exceptions are in Nashville and Atlanta where, for the first
time in this cyclical expansion, a few of my contacts in real estate and banking are expressing
some concern about developers who seem to be forgetting the lessons of the 1980s. I will
save the stories that go with that observation, but I have heard some very interesting stories
that make the point. I certainly will watch that closely. Some bankers in Atlanta also
commented recently to me that they think the multifamily market in Atlanta may be close to

3/25/97
being overbuilt. The good news is that they are going to pull back their lending to that sector.
Manufacturing, too, seems to have slowed somewhat from earlier in the expansion. Our
own survey of manufacturing showed declines in the proportion of firms reporting increases
in production, shipments, and new orders. Employment, the average workweek, and the
index of expected business activity six months out also declined, and expectations of future
capital spending have dropped off some since our previous survey.
As Tom Hoenig mentioned for his area, oil and gas activity is strong--in Louisiana
in our case. That activity not only has pushed the rig counts to high levels, but it has brought
demand for crew boats and other kinds of support spending to higher levels. We reported at
the last meeting on signs that energy prices would decline, and that has happened, as you
know. One of our directors who is close to the natural gas business noted that supplies have
now been rebuilt after the drain from last year's harsh winter, and that should continue to put
downward pressure on energy prices, particularly natural gas, in the period ahead. Shipyards
along the Gulf Coast report good orders. One yard in Mobile is particularly excited about
getting the first order from Chinese interests; it is for four large container ships.
To be sure, labor markets remain tight in our area, with pressures now evident
almost uniformly across our entire region. The extraordinary pressures that we saw in the
Tennessee area have lessened somewhat. We still get very few reports of unusually large
increases in wages, and we still see almost no signs of cutthroat attempts to steal workers
from other companies. We are picking up some reports in our manufacturing survey, and I
would underscore "some," of increasing pressures on input prices in the sense that they may
be beginning to see some of that also in finished good prices. However, there still is no real
change in most retail prices.

3/25/97
Finally at the regional level, we have two new directors this year from the retail
automobile industry--one associated with a group of moderate-size dealerships and another
who ran the Alamo car rental company until it was recently acquired by one of the new
conglomerates. Those directors suggested at our last meeting that we are seeing what they
call a "seismic" shift in the retail auto business as the consolidations that are under way
continue. They think the consolidations will bring significant efficiencies in operations and
an important change in the bargaining power that dealers have with manufacturers, all of
which they think should bode well for the prices that consumers will pay for autos down the
road.
At the national level, we like almost everyone else have been surprised by the
persisting strength in the economy early this year. We continue to expect a slowdown in the
expansion later this year and we hope we will not be disappointed. We have not raised our
fourth-quarter over fourth-quarter growth forecast appreciably. We expect growth in
expenditures on housing and consumer durables to be measurably slower as we move into the
rest of the year. We do not expect unemployment to drop quite as low as is indicated in the
Greenbook. On the other hand, and probably as a consequence, we also are not quite as
pessimistic with respect to inflation, whether measured by the CPI or the deflator. We still
see few signs of stress, excesses, or imbalances except for persistent tightness in labor
markets. Having said that, it is my judgment that the risks are now somewhat greater on the
upside. My view stems mostly from the greater-than-expected consumer spending that we
can readily see, fueled by either more borrowing, lower saving rates, or as Mike Prell
reminded us again this morning, the possibility that we will see some additional kick to
consumer spending from the stock market wealth effect.

3/25/97
One offsetting risk on the downside, as Cathy Minehan also mentioned, is our
view that the outlook for exports could change. Should the dollar not fall back or even rise
further, and we think that is certainly possible, growth in exports could be less than is
currently built into the forecast. There also remains the strong and growing probability of
increased wage pressures, although we are less sure than some that those will be fully fed
through to price inflation. But again, on balance, I think the risks are considerably greater on
the upside. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. The Philadelphia District economy is operating at a high level.
Intense competition, however, seems to be keeping the lid on wages and prices.
Manufacturing is doing well; retail sales are generally good. Commercial real estate is
shifting from a buyer's market to a seller's market. Vacancy rates are going down; rents and
property values are going up. The incentive to build is picking up, and developers are
shopping for land. Competition for bank lending is stiff, with the predictable squeezing of
margins and slippage of underwriting standards. The slippage in lending standards is always
done by the bank down the street. The problem of one large credit card issuer in the District
clearly has had a sobering effect on other issuers, but that occurred too late to avoid varying
degrees of hangover for most of them. I think the issuer that received the press attention
probably is more prone to problems and not as well managed as some of the others in our
District.
Turning to wages and prices, some selected wage hikes are occurring. On the
whole, however, the wage/price climate in the District remains subdued. One manufacturing

3/25/97
CEO I recently spoke with, and I think she is representative of manufacturers generally, said
emphatically that increases in productivity will continue to absorb wage hikes.
Turning to the nation, the uncomfortable uncertainty that most of us have felt
around the table over the last six to nine months is partly explained, I think, by how people
look at the economy. Most people we talked with see the economy from their own point of
view. They see business rolling in, stiff competition, and productivity going up. They also
see some labor shortages, but those are the kinds of problems they like to live with. Now,
that view contrasts with the macro framework that I think lays out the prospects for problems
down the road. It strikes me that there is a greater divergence between the person-in-thestreet view and this macro framework than I have seen in a long time. There is not much
appreciation, I think, for that macro framework view. We have to weigh the risks, and my
sense is that the national economy has considerable self-feeding momentum. Although
inflation is remarkably quiescent for now, I think the risks have shifted fairly substantially
toward the upside of too much demand pressing against supply down the road. With the
strong demand, I think the current federal funds rate almost surely means that we are
pumping too much liquidity into the economy. It is the old pegging problem that we know so
well from the past. While patience has been wise, I think some insurance against overheating
makes sense now in order to keep the economic expansion on track.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stem.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Most measures of economic activity in
the Ninth District remain positive. In particular, labor markets are still tight, and there are
widespread labor shortages. But we are at the point that this is so familiar, so much a part of
the landscape, that people mentioned it only in passing. Wage pressures are there but they

3/25/97
are scattered and by no means overwhelming. With regard to other District developments,
construction activity is positive, the manufacturing sector is doing well, and state tax
revenues are running well above what had been anticipated. A major potential negative is the
weather. Widespread flooding is anticipated in the spring, but for better or for worse, the
snow and ice have not started to melt yet.
As far as the national economy is concerned, I certainly agree with the significant
upward revisions in the Greenbook forecast, and I think, if anything, they may be
conservative. My sense of the dynamics of the situation is that the economy will probably-and will certainly without a change in policy--grow at the higher pace of the latest forecast or
maybe even faster. I would point to a couple of factors. My sense of the inventory situation
is that there is considerable room for some significant spending on inventories going forward
and that such spending will probably add significantly to aggregate demand.
As I think about financial conditions and the broad range of variables that one
might throw into that bucket, it seems to me that financial conditions remain very
comfortable whether we look at interest rates, growth in the broad measures of money, equity
prices--even though they have waffled a bit recently--or credit availability in general. As I
see it, we have financial conditions that are consistent with further substantial expansion in
demand.
Finally, as far as inflation is concerned, I agree that a variety of temporary factors
has worked so far to restrain inflation to a pace that is certainly lower than I would have
expected at this point in the expansion. I think that may continue for some time. In
particular, I would point to the state of many of the other major industrial economies around
the world where there is considerable slack. In my view, that has been an important factor in

3/25/97
what has been going on here. But having said that, I would emphasize that the factors that
have been restraining inflation are certainly temporary and that the inflationary risks are
clear.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. We have all been watching this remarkable economy with some
puzzlement for the last several months. Until now, the signs of strength in the private
domestic economy always seemed to be mixed with some signals that the expansion might be
slowing down. What strikes me at this point is that the signs of a slowdown are nearly
absent. Virtually all the statistics at the national level point to continued strength. This
pattern is reflected almost uniformly in the reports from around the nation, although the
report for Atlanta sounds a little different. Labor markets are tight; employment is moving
up; labor participation is high; the workweek is longer; initial unemployment claims are
down; all these indicators reinforce the good jobs picture. Consumer spending is strong;
inventories are lean; business investment, housing, and nonresidential construction, you
name it, look good. It just does not look like an economy that is running out of steam.
There are two elements of restraint. One is the federal budget, which is modestly
restrictive. I think the outlook for fiscal policy is probably the biggest difference between this
year and back in 1965. I remain fairly optimistic that we will get a budget deal, but we
probably will not get it until August or September. There is no pressure of an election to keep
the Congress from trying hard to finish its work and get home, so the debates will probably
string out. But I think the budget deal will get done without a government shutdown and
without a continuing resolution, and the agreement is likely to include a modest CPI fix,
agreed to very quickly at the very end of the legislative process. In that regard, I think there

3/25/97

was an overreaction to the President's rejection of the commission idea. With all due respect
to the Chairman, they do not need a commission; they just need to fix the CPI. My guess is
that they will do something.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, let's do it! [Laughter]
MS. RIVLIN. The long-run effect depends on whether the budget legislation
includes significant reductions in the growth of Medicaid and Medicare. I think the chances
are quite good that it will. Nevertheless, the effects will be mostly psychological and
possibly not particularly strong even there. The real effect of having a deal is not going to be
very great in the near term.
The other negative that has been mentioned and is much bigger in its effect is net
exports. This clearly is helping restrain the economy at the moment, but it is exacerbating
the long-run problem of the current account deficit for which we have no obvious solution at
the moment. The case for viewing this economy as just a little too robust to be sustainable is
the clearest one that I have seen since I have served on the Board; admittedly that has not
been very long. A small move to restrain growth and the future acceleration of inflation that
seems increasingly likely could prolong this remarkable expansion, and that seems to me to
be what we ought to want to do. I do not see very much downside risk. If we had a sharper,
better policy instrument that operated more immediately, we could certainly afford to wait,
but unfortunately we do not.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. The Eighth District economy continues to operate
at a high level. Contacts report little or no change in the growth rate of economic activity in
the past few months and continue to be optimistic about the near term. With unemployment

3/25/97
rates well below the national level, labor markets remain tight in much of the District,
especially for construction workers. Payroll employment increased at a 2.3 percent annual
rate for the three months ended in January, a rate not seen since October 1995 and well above
the 1-1/2 percent average rate posted in 1996. Second-quarter District auto production is
expected to be up more than 10 percent from the first-quarter level. Early 1997 sales tax
receipts are up substantially in the District from their year-ago levels, suggesting strong
economic activity, particularly at the retail level. Residential and commercial construction
activity has stayed relatively strong, although January residential permits dropped from their
year-ago levels in most District metropolitan areas. About 120 counties in Arkansas,
Indiana, Kentucky, and Tennessee have been declared federal disaster areas as a result of the
tornadoes, heavy rains, and flooding that occurred in early March. Although reliable
estimates of damage are not yet available, federal disaster assistance is expected to lead to
new home construction by displaced residents. That was the experience after the major 1993
floods in the Midwest.
At the national level, forecasters see continuing expansion. A burst of
consumption growth is expected in the current quarter, which will be the highest quarterly
increase in consumption since the end of 1992 if the staff forecast of 5 percent growth at an
annual rate is realized. The run-up in stock prices and the high level of confidence reported
in consumer surveys as well as early reports on retail sales and residential construction
support this conclusion. On the one hand, such an outlook suggests that the downside risks
for the economy are limited in the short run. On the other, the longer-run inflation outlook is
not so sanguine. Despite moderate decreases in PPI and CPI inflation so far in 1997, there is
a heightened concern about an inflationary impulse emanating from observed price increases,

3/25/97
a tight labor market, and a continuing easy credit market. In addition, we have seen
anecdotal evidence along the lines of what Bill McDonough mentioned with respect to the
apparently shifting pattern of health care cost increases from a declining to a rising trend that
will no longer tend to offset at least a portion of the wage increases.
It does not seem to me that the current stance of monetary policy will mitigate the
inflation impulse that I outlined. Growth rates in the broad monetary aggregates, which
conceivably are back on track, are running at or above our announced targets. The yield
curve has steepened further, increasing the likelihood that the federal funds rate target is too
low to prevent further acceleration in monetary growth. All told, the longer-term inflation
trend may be a lot less favorable than the 3 percent norm of most forecasters. My reading of
the economy supports the conclusion that we are at risk of losing the hard-won credibility of
our commitment to hold inflation at 3 percent. In the current situation, it is vitally important
that we act to preempt prospective further increases in inflation and thereby avoid the
substantially higher costs of having to do a lot more policy tightening later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. The economy in the Eleventh District remains healthy. While
data for January showed an actual decline in District employment levels, I am inclined to
discount those figures because of weather-related factors and because they are inconsistent
with the anecdotal evidence that we have been getting from all our boards of directors and
advisory councils. The composition of growth in the Eleventh District has shifted somewhat.
Last year's downturn in the computer chip industry seems to be behind us, and the industry
is once again announcing expansion plans. Job gains in our District's semiconductor
industry are expected to be about 10 percent this year, offsetting the losses of last year.

3/25/97
As both Tom Hoenig and Jack Guynn mentioned for their Districts, oil and gas
drilling continues to move forward at all-out, full capacity. The rig count in Texas is 20
percent above a year ago. Shortages of rigs and crews continue to be reported. There is a
widespread feeling that the drop in oil prices over the last few months will not result in any
drilling slowdown because it is the use of new technology that is making drilling profitable at
prices anywhere above $18. The use of 3-D seismic techniques has drastically reduced the
number of dry holes, both on land and at sea, if you can imagine a dry hole at sea.
[Laughter]
The construction sector showed signs of slowing over the last few months in
single-family and multifamily homes, industrial and warehouse space, and retail shopping
centers. Office construction continues to rebound from fairly low levels, and a large number
of medium-size projects have been announced recently, especially in far north Dallas. I
might add that when I moved to Dallas six years ago, this was the very region that had the
greatest concentration of RTC properties in Texas. Obviously, the glut is over. This has
been reflected in rising commercial rents in the suburban areas. There are even scattered
reports that prices of prime shopping center property have doubled over the last year or so.
We continue to see signs that the Mexican economy is coming back, although there
apparently is still more slack in Mexico than in Utah. [Laughter] Warehouse space in
Laredo is fully leased, and reports are coming in from both our border and inland cities that
Mexican shoppers are returning. However, retail sales to Mexicans remain below
pre-devaluation levels, partly because Wal-Mart and other U.S. retailers have opened outlets
on the Mexican side of the border.

3/25/97
As for wage and price pressures in the District, it seems like the same song,
seventh verse. Wages overall appear to be increasing on a slowly rising gradient, but
exceptions to this generalization have been reported with increasing frequency. Still, they
are sporadic exceptions against the backdrop of a steady trend. As for pressures on final
prices of goods and services, we hear an unending story that competitive pressures negate the
ability of business firms to pass cost increases forward.
Turning to the national economy, it is difficult to find signs of weakness or
imbalances. The inflation picture in the Eleventh District is a reflection of the trends I see
nationally. Consumer and producer price increases have been subdued. The broader
inflation measures look even better. As for inflation in the pipeline, gold and commodity
prices do not suggest too many reasons to be concerned. M2 growth does, however, remain
on the high side, perhaps as a result of the pegging problem that Ed Boehne mentioned
earlier.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to focus on two key questions
about the outlook that I believe should shape our decision about monetary policy today.
First, how does the economic environment, meaning both the recent data and the current
forecast, differ today from that prevailing at the July and September FOMC meetings--which
in my judgment were the closest calls for a tightening of policy--and more generally from
that prevailing for the entire recent period of the asymmetric policy directive? Second, how
do today's forecasts for 1997 by members of the FOMC compare to the central tendencies of
the forecasts for the year that the members submitted at the February meeting and that were
incorporated in the Humphrey-Hawkins report?

3/25/97
This focus presumes that any change in policy we contemplate today would reflect
a change in the FOMC members' readings of the fundamentals and risks in the economic
outlook. That would be the natural assumption. However, the comments of at least some
members at the last meeting could be interpreted as indicating that they already had changed
their view about monetary policy but thought that a tightening should be postponed until this
meeting to allow an opportunity to prepare the market. And the market certainly has been
prepared! [Laughter] For myself, however, some trigger, some change in the fundamentals,
is necessary to push me to accept a change in policy. I will focus here on whether or not
there has been such a change in fundamentals.
Let me remind you of the basic framework that has underpinned my judgment
about monetary policy during this period. I worry about two risks to the inflation outlook:
the utilization and the growth risks. The utilization risk refers to the possibility that the
prevailing utilization rates may already be so high that inflation will rise over time. The
growth risk relates to the possibility that future above-trend growth will raise utilization rates
still further, thereby aggravating the risk of higher inflation. Given the uncertainty about
how to judge utilization rates, we have tempered our inclination to be forward-looking in our
policy actions and have given added weight to recent data on inflation and labor costs. There
is, nevertheless, a causal chain that I believe we have been relying on--from growth relative
to trend, to utilization rates, to wage changes, and finally to inflation. There are, to be sure,
complications associated with changing profit margins, possible change in the productivity
trend, favorable or unfavorable supply shocks, and change in threshold levels of utilization
rates. But this causal chain is and must be at the heart of preemptive policy.

3/25/97
Policy could be said to be more forward-looking or preemptive the more willing
we are to act earlier in this causal chain. The importance I attach to this causal chain
necessitates a response to the flurry of disclaimers around this table at the last meeting about
the usefulness of NAIRU. I intended to respond then but, frankly, I somehow got distracted.
[Laughter] As the most enthusiastic champion of the NAIRU concept around this table, let
me briefly respond now because I think that concept is relevant to our decision today.
The concept fundamentally involves three principles. First, a major proximate
source of higher inflation is excess demand in the labor and/or product markets. Second, the
causal chain is most likely to proceed from excess demand in the labor market, to wage
changes and hence labor costs, and finally to price inflation. Third, as long as the excess
demand prevails, inflation continues to rise progressively and indefinitely over time. I
frankly would be shocked if most of us around this table did not believe in these principles.
To be sure, applying them has become more difficult of late because the implied
relationships have not been nearly as tight as had been the case earlier. There are data that
suggest some decline in the NAIRU. Nevertheless, these principles must in my view be the
framework for conducting a disciplined monetary policy, and I believe that is central to any
decision to tighten today.
Now back to the outlook: What is different today in the data and/or the forecast
compared to what we had at FOMC meetings during the period of asymmetric directives?
To set up my later discussion of my position on monetary policy, I will organize the
discussion from the perspective of the Taylor Rule. A rough summary is that current
utilization rates are about the same and core inflation is lower. Unlike at earlier meetings,
the forecast now shows continued above-trend growth immediately ahead and, as a result,

3/25/97
higher utilization rates over the next year or two. The current Greenbook projection of a
decline in the unemployment rate is not much different from what was projected at the last
meeting, though I would argue that this forecast is more believable now for many of us. At
the February meeting, both the Greenbook and FOMC members were projecting near-trend
growth over 1997, but the FOMC members were forecasting stable unemployment rates in
contrast to the decline projected in the Greenbook. The current data on utilization rates and
core inflation are no more alarming now than earlier, and perhaps less so. So, if we want to
justify action today, we have to look at an earlier stage of the causal chain.
In his recent testimony, the Chairman has focused on labor market indicators as
being of special importance in reaching a decision for a preemptive move, and I agree. Let
us take stock here. The data on compensation are somewhat mixed, but they suggest some
acceleration on balance. The latest 12-month increase in average hourly earnings is 1/4 to
1/2 percentage point higher than had prevailed at the time of the July and September
meetings. On the other hand, the increases in average hourly earnings were rather tame in
the last couple of months. There is certainly a hint here but hardly a smoking gun. On the
other hand, virtually all other indicators of labor market tightness are at more elevated levels
today: help wanted ads are up, initial claims for unemployment insurance are down, the index
of hard-to-get jobs is down, and consumer sentiment about jobs being plentiful is up. But the
key to our decision today is the change in the forecast.
Ill focus now on the Greenbook forecast, which may be more aggressive in certain
respects than some of our own forecasts. This will effectively serve to make more dramatic
the point I want to make. There is a significant change in the current Greenbook forecast for
1997 from the forecasts prepared for the July and September meetings and even that for the

3/25/97

February meeting. Compared to the earlier meetings, the Greenbook now projects a 2-3/4
percent rate of growth over 1997 in contrast to just above 2 percent at the July and September
meetings and 2-1/4 percent at the February meeting. This follows an unexpectedly strong
second half of 1996. To be sure, as is almost always the case in such projections, growth
slows to trend over the forecast period. But the combination of a stronger second half of
1996 and an upward revised forecast for 1997 translates into an increase in the level of output
and hence utilization rates in 1997 and 1998. At the July and September meetings, the
unemployment rate was expected to stabilize near 5-1/2 percent for 1997. Now it is expected
to decline to 5 percent this year and below 5 percent in 1998. Just to underline the difficulty
in making and selling any policy change, the other important difference in the Greenbook
forecast is that inflation for 1997 has been revised downward relative to the July and
September meetings.
To repeat the second question, how did we FOMC members change our forecasts
for growth over 1997 and the unemployment rate at the end of this year compared to the
central tendencies of the forecasts that we submitted for incorporation in the
Humphrey-Hawkins report? For my part, I see the economy as having more near-term
momentum than I did at the last meeting, and therefore I now expect the unemployment rate
to be lower in the second half of the year and into 1998. As a result, I have revised upward
my expectations for inflation over 1998.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For a number of meetings now, the
economy has seemed to be deja vu. For some time, we have felt that we were looking at a
fully utilized economy, one with tight and tightening labor markets that seemed likely to

3/25/97
begin to show escalating labor costs and from there escalating inflation--in short, an
overheating economy. But that has not happened so far. In fact, inflation is flat to down
according to many statistical series. Our expectation has been that the expansion would slow
to growth at about trend and that this might allow us to experience a quiescent inflation rate
for some period of time or indefinitely. This is a very rosy scenario. It certainly has seemed
quite plausible, and it has been working for a long time. Our policy has been to stay alert,
stay asymmetric, but basically to wait and see. While I have never been very comfortable
with it, I certainly have been solidly in that camp.
But now I think the very strong first quarter that we seem to be experiencing calls
into question the continued viability of that scenario. Growth for the past four quarters
including this one is going to be somewhere in excess of 3-1/2 percent. That is certainly well
beyond anybody's estimate of potential in an economy whose resources already seem to be
fully utilized. And it now seems that there is very little that is likely to slow that growth
materially. We talked about all the factors this morning: job formation and the purchasing
power that it creates, surprisingly strong construction, both residential and nonresidential,
sky-high consumer confidence with jobs plentiful, and supportive wealth effects. If
consumer spending should slow in the near future, I think we probably would get an
inventory pop that would keep things going. Certainly, there is a potential for slower growth
if we were to get a stronger dollar or a bear stock market. There are other potential shocks I
am sure, but they seem to have a considerably lower probability.
The very strong and persistent job formation that we have seen is very likely in my
view to start to take its toll on costs. The unemployment rate has been held up as high as it
is by the fact that the labor force has been growing at an unexpectedly high rate. The labor

3/25/97
force participation rate is now at a record high, I believe, or very close to it. If the rapid
growth of the labor force were to slow, the unemployment rate would probably go down
substantially and costs would probably and perhaps inevitably rise. But if that labor force
growth somehow continues, we will have to wonder about the quality of the new labor and
what is going to happen to productivity and costs as a result. Certainly, there is some other
combination of potential developments in the labor market. Some employers who are not
chasing their firm's stock price will simply restrain production, slow growth down rather
than allow their costs to rise. I am sure that many will be able to keep their productivity
growing. There are employers who are causing jobs to migrate to lower cost areas, though it
looks as if Utah is off the list. [Laughter] Many are going offshore. That is happening, but
we have to wonder whether there is likely to be enough of that to affect aggregate indicators
of economic performance. There certainly are a lot of things or combinations of things that
could stretch out the benign era that we are in. But given what we see happening in the
economy right now, what we know about the utilization rate of economic resources, and what
seem to me to be the highest probabilities in coming quarters, it may soon be time for us to
consider pulling up stakes and moving the camp to higher ground. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Is that the result of the floods?
MR. KELLEY. I started to say something like that, Mr. Chairman, but I thought
that was just taking it too far.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I am glad you restrained yourself from referring to
the notion of excess liquidity. [Laughter]
MR. KELLEY. I would not want to see us get under water. [Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips, I think you better talk now.

3/25/97
MS. PHILLIPS. My goodness. Well, I guess I am batting cleanup here. Last
month we were trying to determine whether the returns for the fourth quarter of 1996 and
early 1997 constituted a temporary burst of energy and the economy was about to settle down
to the proverbial sustainable growth trend or whether those developments marked the
beginning of a stronger growth path. It does appear that we have a bit more confirmation in
the direction of the latter than last time. In addition, as Governor Meyer mentioned, we have
come out of 1996 with an economy that is operating at a higher level. So, additional growth
could put significant strain on our product and labor markets.
The areas of economic strength that have been confirmed since our last meeting
include consumer spending, which is supported by increases in income from a strong labor
market and perhaps even by stock market wealth effects. Housing activity appeared to slow
in the fourth quarter, but it is now showing signs of reviving or at least continuing to operate
at a relatively high level. In the business sector, we have persisting strength in profits and
cash flows, restructured balance sheets, and reasonably priced capital. I see no reason to
expect a slowdown in expenditures for equipment or structures. With demand holding up
and space shortages developing, we may continue to see strength in construction
expenditures with follow-along equipment purchases. If anything, inventories are lean, so
the goods-producing industrial sector should be able to maintain its momentum. This rosy
scenario does not mean that the business cycle is dead, just that it is a long cycle.
Some of the stories that we see concerning the industrial sector are in a sense
showing a little more creativity. I would point to the Business Week article this week that
indicated the technology industry is about to "tank." I must say that I have a hard time
swallowing that story. Granted the technology industry is competitive and some fallout is

3/25/97
likely to occur among producers, the fundamentals for continued demand for information and
communications technology are not going to disappear.
The monetary aggregates, although we have not been talking much about them
recently, are confirming the economic strength. I believe that the industrial sector is aware
that it is about time for us to remove the punch bowl.
The only area of weakness in the economy that has been confirmed since the last
meeting is net exports. Although this sector is somewhat of a drag on U.S. growth, strength
in the domestic economy significantly mitigates the effect. Another area, which Governor
Rivlin mentioned, is the fiscal situation. In a sense, stronger economic growth is improving
the chances of a successful budget deal.
Turning to inflation, although ostensibly it appears fairly benign, I would argue
that there are growing signs of latent or pipeline pressures. I would point to average hourly
earnings of non-supervisory production workers. The anecdotal stories of labor shortages
and wage pressures are increasing, and employers certainly are getting more creative. I hope
that productivity improvements will contain labor cost pressures, but it seems to me that
there are some limits to this process. Governor Kelley referred to that issue. There are some
commodity price pressures showing up: President Moskow mentioned hogs, certainly a
prime commodity to which attention should be paid; other commodity price pressures may be
seen in metals, lumber, and coffee. There also seems to be a lot of testing of the
sustainability of price increases. With energy prices easing off, it is hard to know exactly
how quickly any of these pipeline pressures will show through to the CPI, but it seems to me
that we have moved further into the inflation alert zone.

3/25/97
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I assume that the Beigebook did pass through the
group around this table before it got out to the public. I would suggest that you all go back
and read it. It really is quite interesting to see the difference between what is in that
document and what was said around this table today. Shall we go to coffee?
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. [Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don? If not, let me start off. It is
quite evident that we have come to a point, as we suggested we might at the last meeting,
where as Don put it--how did you put it?
MR. KOHN. "Deliver."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have to "deliver." Let me, however, review the
various aspects of what is going on and try to put them into a policy context, which I think
we need to fashion fairly carefully. Let me start with something that has not been discussed
very much around the table this morning. The proposition that inflation has stopped falling is
not readily provable. That may seem to be a rather ridiculous statement, but if we look at the
data, what we see is that the rate of inflation, no matter how we look at it, has been edging
lower with some bumps here and there. Even if we add back the BLS adjustments, that
conclusion is not changed significantly; it certainly is not changed with respect to the GDP
chain-weighted index and the like. The reason is very clearly that productivity is badly
underestimated and indeed may actually be accelerating. If we start with the proposition that
price levels are moving up very modestly, that domestic operating profit margins are stable
or maybe slightly improved, and that consolidated nonlabor costs in the nonfinancial

3/25/97
corporate sector are going nowhere, we necessarily end up with the conclusion that on a
consolidated basis unit labor costs in the nonfinancial corporate sector, as I mentioned at the
last meeting, are not moving very much, if at all. Since we know what compensation per
hour is doing, it necessarily follows that productivity has to be rising almost as much as the
compensation numbers. Indeed, all the anecdotal stories that we hear tend to confirm that.
This suggests, as Mike Prell pointed out, that we may finally be getting the productivity gains
that many have anticipated from the synergies created by the rapidly developing computer
technology information structure. The gains surely seem to be showing up in a lot of areas,
and it is very difficult to understand the profitability numbers we are looking at without some
reference to significant improvements in productivity. The reported per share profit figures, I
should add, are stronger than domestic operating earnings despite the fact that the dollar has
been firming. That's because the earnings of foreign affiliates, which are a significant
portion of both the S&P 500 index and the NIPA data, have been rising rather strongly and
indeed have been an increasing share of total profits over the last couple of years. So, we
have to discount the reported profits at least slightly. But even after doing that, we still get a
sense that the rate of increase in operating profits of domestic firms probably implies
modestly accelerating productivity.
The reason why manufacturers in particular and business people more generally
have the view that inflation is dead and the economy is in a new era is that that is the way it
feels to them. In other words, if we examine individual company accounts, we find that
business firms are offsetting their cost increases fairly aggressively and quite successfully.
They are not able to raise prices. Pricing power is gone, and the reason it is gone, as we have
discussed previously, is that competitors have sufficiently high rates of return to enable them

3/25/97
to undercut price increases and go for market share, should some firm try to raise its prices.
This also implies that a degree of slack still exists in the system that all these business people
can see. You can speak to any of the most sophisticated corporate managers, and you will
get exactly the same story. The answer, of course, is that as sophisticated and farseeing as
they may be, their time frame is too short for the purposes of monetary policy. Indeed, as we
might put it in a macro sense, there are certain realities that are consistent with perceptions of
the individual companies but inconsistent with the macro data.
First of all, it is pretty clear at this stage that the tightness in labor markets is
increasing. Initial claims for insured unemployment continue at a very low level, showing no
signs of turning up. Insured unemployment data have moved off the previous track and have
gone down. Help-wanted advertising, which admittedly is not the world's most reliable
statistic, has suddenly perked up in recent months in a way that we have not seen for a
number of years. Most importantly, as a number of you have pointed out, labor force
participation now seems to be rising after being stagnant. And if we look at the internal
structure of the workforce, we see that employers are hiring marginal workers. The first sign
of some labor market pressure is that new workers are recruited from outside the labor force.
The problem is that there is no way to increase the working age population, which means
that we can expand our labor resources only up to a point. We then run out of qualified
people to hire. The numbers in this regard look quite impressive. We also are seeing that
average weekly hours are moving up, and in a sense we are running out of space to expand,
at least in terms of labor market resources. The reason I emphasize this is that it is far
simpler to evaluate capacity use in the labor market than capacity use of other producer
resources, and since either labor or capital utilization limits can restrain economic growth, we

3/25/97
need not argue that both constraints are in place. All we need is for one to be exerting a
constraining effect and labor supply clearly is.
It is very difficult to see the emergence of resource constraints in the nonlabor
structure. The reason, of course, is that advancing technology has created a degree of
flexibility that we never had before. Not only can business firms now produce customized
products in small batches through computerized and rationalized production techniques that
they did not have previously, but they can also add features or take them away--do whatever
they want--in a way they never had the flexibility to do before. This means that the concept
of capacity is far more flexible than ever. The only way that we can detect obvious
difficulties or pressures is by watching such things as lead times on deliveries, overtime
hours, or other measures of tightness that are symptoms of the difficulty of using the existing
state of technology to adapt capacity and facilities to unanticipated developments. One way
business firms have accomplished all of that is by moving to a quite remarkable just-in-time
inventory system. They have tightened the production system to a point where, as part of its
flexibility, they have the capability of essentially not having inventories other than work in
process. Indeed, part of the improvement in productivity has resulted from squeezing down
the way businesses use resources. As a consequence, inventories measured in terms of days'
supply at factory value are now at very low levels.
The reason I raise the issue of factory value is that when we are looking at a
demand system, the markup of inventories in the distribution channels is not a truly relevant
consideration. We are interested in the number of shoes in the distribution channel if we are
calculating production; we are not interested in the constant dollar value of those inventories
because that will change depending on where they are in the production and distribution

3/25/97
process. While I may exaggerate when I say that the markup for the inventories is not all that
important, it nonetheless is not as valuable in measuring the tightness of supply and demand
as the factory value numbers. For purposes of measuring GDP, the markup obviously
increases value added, which is why we calculate it, but it does not give us information about
the supply of shoes. It just tells us what the value added has been in the distribution process.
One problem with just-in-time inventory systems is that resource use is very
tight. Consequently, if anything abnormal emerges, there is a marked rise in delivery lead
times or bottlenecks. All of a sudden people who think just-in-time inventory management
is terrific find that they now need to add some safety stocks. What happens is that the
inventory pattern then begins to turn around even though days' supply may not go up very
much.
In the current situation, since inventory-sales ratios at factory value have been
coming down in general, inventory investment could go up quite abruptly. As a consequence
of such a development, there is a very clear underlying tightness in the current inventory
situation that is creating significantly more risk on the upside than we had earlier, certainly
more than in the summer of 1996 when inventories had backed up and there was a degree of
slack in the system. That slack has essentially been pulled out of the system at this stage.
It is very hard to believe that personal consumption expenditures are not
significantly affected by the wealth effect. Leaving aside the econometrics, I think that
whenever we get as huge an increase in financial market wealth as we have gotten, people at
some point begin to believe that it is permanent. They start thinking that it is not going to
disappear right away and that they are now in a sense richer. That attitude begins to have an
impact on consumption expenditures. Indeed, if we look at the decline in risk premiums

3/25/97
and/or the cost of capital, what that means essentially is that we are progressively discounting
the future less. If we examine the normal processes by which time-dependent investments
are made, as the risk premiums and the discount factors fall, we see that production is
brought up front from the future. Capital assets are produced today on the basis of expected
returns much further in the future than was true in the previous periods. As the risk
premiums fall, the time preference moves into the future and picks up additional current
demand. I think we are seeing that in consumption expenditures and in home sales.
Let me just add parenthetically that awhile back I discussed the discrepancy
between the level of home sales and the levels of housing starts and permits. What we were
observing was that the level of starts was being supported by declines in permit backlogs and
the level of permits was being held down by sales drawn out of housing inventories. I am
talking about single-family homes. We now are seeing for the first time at least some pickup
in the permit backlogs. This indicates that sales of single-family homes out of existing
stocks finally are beginning to induce builders to take out more permits for new home
construction. While I certainly grant that the February data were an aberration, they do tend
to suggest that housing activity may not be moderating.
Certainly, plant and equipment expenditures are crucially related to this time
preference issue and are undoubtedly being affected by the evidently continuing rise in the
prices of commercial real estate and the quite pronounced decline in vacancies, especially in
suburban areas. We are beginning to see some upward movement in commercial rents.
Having said all of that, we are not at this stage moving into what I would describe
as an overheated boom. We are short of that. For example, it is certainly the case that
homebuilding is at a relatively high level, but it is not accelerating. Motor vehicle sales, I

3/25/97
think, are a little softer than Mike Moskow was suggesting. Our reading of the same people
he spoke to a week ago comes out with a slightly smaller number. Chain store sales have
tended to flatten out. In other words, this economy is not running away to a degree that
would suggest we have to hold everything in place. What we have at this stage is a situation
that is clearly evolving over time. In fact, as I said at the beginning of my comments, we still
do not have concrete evidence to suggest that the inflation rate has stopped going down. In
this situation, we can allow ourselves a fairly considerable amount of time to act. Therefore,
I do not think that there is any particular urgency to move in a very aggressive way. I do
think we have to move, but I don't think that we have to be concerned about being behind the
curve in any measurable way.
Certainly, there are some principles that clearly need to be kept in mind here. One
is that recent experience tends to reinforce our view that low inflation is very positive to
economic growth, to employment, to stability, to all the good things we talk about with
respect to the economy. Therefore, it is crucial to keep inflation low. The argument that we
can wait until we see signs of inflation before taking action fails to take account of how
important this low inflation environment apparently has been in enhancing the recent
performance of the economy. It strikes me that whatever we do, we need above all to make
certain that we keep inflation low, risk premiums low, and the cost of capital low. We
recognize that that can create unusual problems within balance sheets and the like, and
members have expressed some concerns regarding those problems of late. Nonetheless, if
we are talking about long-term equilibrium, high market values are better than low market
values. What we are trying to avoid is bubbles that break, volatility, and the like, but we are

3/25/97
not opposed to the implications of low inflation, which include relatively low risk premiums
and fairly strong economic activity.
I conclude that what we clearly need at this stage is finally to move off the dime. I
think that 25 basis points is enough for now; indeed, I will argue against 50 basis points in a
minute. It is conceivable that economic growth may slow, and it is possible to interpret the
data we have seen as suggesting that backlogs, new orders, and sales are beginning to turn
sluggish outside the high-tech area. As far as the high-tech sector is concerned, we have seen
a very strong acceleration over the last two or three years that is numerically unsustainable
because if that rate of growth were to continue, the high-tech area would soon account for
120 percent of GDP! That clearly is not going to happen. I think the stock market is telling
us that the growth projections implicit in some of those earnings forecasts for high-tech
industries are unrealistic, and there is some evidence that this sector is beginning to flatten
out. One of the reasons why I suspect that Microsoft is not moving terribly fast in coming
out with a Windows 97 is the fact that they are getting some resistance to all these
technological changes. There is a physical incapability of putting in one software revision
after the other, and this reaction could very well be in the process of occurring.
I would not rule out as a significant probability, perhaps not a high probability,
that the current economic expansion is on the verge of some slowing. If that does happen, 25
basis points is not going to be a major inhibiting factor, but 50 basis points, which the market
is not expecting, could be very jolting indeed.
I want to recall a conversation we had when we last decided to move up the federal
funds rate after a long period of no change. That was in February 1994. We had a lengthy
discussion as to whether we would move 50 basis points or 25 basis points. We did 25 basis

3/25/97
points and the market almost fell apart, but not because they did not expect us to move. As
you all know, I had been out there in the immediately preceding weeks in effect waving a red
flag saying we were about to do something. We did it and somebody asked, "Why didn't you
tell us?"
At this stage, the market is expecting 25 basis points. It has discounted such a
move, frankly, but it has done so in a positive way, not a negative way. The stock markets
are up this morning; the bond market is up. I think that if we were to move 50 basis points
today after a long period of doing nothing, though being vigilant if you like, we suddenly
would shock the market into thinking that we must feel that we are behind the curve. We are
not behind the curve, and we have a lot of time to take various actions as we perceive the
need to take them.
I think the odds are better than 50/50 that the move we are considering will not be
our last tightening move. We are very likely to have to move again, though I see a low
probability of a very considerable near-term acceleration that would raise inflationary
pressures and require us to move before our May meeting, which you will remember is two
months away. I think we would have to have a telephone conference to consider such a
move partly because the views regarding the risks of rising inflation among our constituents,
especially the business community, deviate so far from where we are that it is very important
for us not only to move appropriately but also to make certain that people understand why we
are doing it. You may recall that there was a fairly broad consensus at our last meeting that
we ought to condition the markets in the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony to the likelihood that
we were finally going to move. I think that was a desirable thing for us to do. I would say
that the stage is set for us to take action, and I would argue that we should do only 25 basis

3/25/97
points. I must say that it definitely would be better to do 25 basis points than to do nothing.
I believe a failure to act would be a major mistake, given what we see out there in the
economy.
I would prefer symmetry at this stage if for no other reason than our having been
asymmetric for so long I am worried about devaluing the currency so to speak. I do not think
that symmetry or asymmetry will affect our actions one way or the other, and I must tell you
that I do not feel strongly about my preference. If we were to move further before the next
meeting, we would do so with a preceding telephone conference, so as a practical matter the
symmetry or asymmetry doesn't mean anything in this situation. It does, however, establish
a presumption that we probably would move again in May. The issue is basically whether
we want to convey that notion in advance, because having asymmetry and then not moving
again is something that I think we ought not to get involved with. In sum, my view on the
symmetry/asymmetry issue is more a mechanical than a policy matter. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. I would strongly support this set of moves--the 25 basis points and
a symmetric directive. I think what we say about our action is terribly important, not just in
the announcement but what we all say about it over the next few days. I believe the key
words should be that we want to sustain the growth of the economy and to sustain our ability
to have tight labor markets. There is an enormous benefit, which we are seeing, in having
tight labor markets, and I think we ought to say that sustaining them is our goal. I also would
support a symmetric directive because I think there is significant uncertainty about whether
we will want to move again in May. We do not want to stack the deck.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.

3/25/97
MR. MEYER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I strongly support your
recommendation for a 25 basis point increase in the funds rate, and I can accept your
recommendation for a symmetric directive though I could have been persuaded to go for an
asymmetric one. I will come back to that later. I want to focus my remarks, though, on an
analytical framework for supporting this kind of a move. First, I want to consider the
implications of the Taylor Rule and talk about the importance of a flexible approach to
interest rates in response to economic developments. I also want to explain why we should
not leave the task of countercyclical policy to the bond market and present an interpretation of
tightening in terms of what I will call the maxi/min solution.
The Taylor Rule, as Don Kohn noted in his presentation, would suggest no move
at this meeting because utilization rates are about the same as they have been and core
inflation is actually lower. While the Taylor Rule does not provide support for an action
today, it would suggest that, if the Greenbook forecast proves to be correct, we will want to
tighten later. There is, however, an alternative specification of the Taylor Rule that would, in
my view, support a tightening of policy today. I will call it the forward-looking Taylor Rule.
To be sure, the standard rule is forward-looking to a degree in relation to inflation because it
includes current utilization rates. But in the forward-looking Taylor Rule, actual values of
inflation and utilization rates are replaced by forecasts. There is a growing literature on
forward-looking policy reaction functions. An early paper was done by Steve McNees at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston in the mid-1980s and updated in the early 1990s. Over the
last year, in fact, there has been a flurry of additional work along this avenue, including work
in progress at the Board, which finds that policymaking has tended to evolve over the last 15
years from reliance on incoming data to gradual responses to forecasts. However, these

3/25/97
papers are an exercise in description and what we really need is a normative analysis to
confirm that moving in response to forecasts, given the accuracy of forecasts, would produce
better results than responding to actual data.
Would such a forward-looking reaction function provide support for moving today
when we did not choose to move at earlier meetings? In terms of thinking about raising
interest rates today, we might interpret the recent strengthening as a shift in the IS curve and
ask whether monetary policy should impose a horizontal LM curve that would resist the
natural tendency for stronger growth to push up interest rates. Alternatively, should
monetary policy enforce an upward sloping LM curve that allows a stabilizing response to
cyclical strength? In fact, there has been a lot of discussion or implicit commentary around
the table about the old pegging strategy, the mistakes of the 1960s, and also more discussion
of M2 than at any of the previous FOMC meetings that I have attended. One of the
implications of imposing that horizontal LM curve is allowing an acceleration of M2 growth
in response to a shift in the IS curve.
Some might argue that because long-term interest rates already have risen along
with the dollar, the economy is moving along an upward-sloping LM curve. I do not believe,
however, that we should leave monetary policy to the bond market. The question is whether
we should be validating or resisting the recent move in long-term rates. That move after all
reflected to a significant degree the bond markets' expectation of a shift in monetary policy,
particularly as a result of the Chairman's recent testimony combined with the recent strength
in the data. Let's pat the bond markets on the back and tell them that we appreciate their
effort but also let them know that they should not have to do all the work.

3/25/97
Finally, let me discuss the maxi/min solution. Here I compare the consequences of
two types of mistakes we could make today: not tightening when that would have been
appropriate versus tightening when it was not needed. In this approach, a decision today can
be interpreted as selecting the best of the worst possible outcomes. First, consider what
would happen if we tighten when that turns out to be unnecessary, NAIRU could turn out to
be lower than anticipated, productivity growth higher than projected, or demand
unexpectedly weaker. The unemployment rate could then be higher than would have been
desirable and inflation lower than otherwise. In this case, the unemployment rate would still
be at a historically low level and inflation would be moving toward our long-run objective,
not a really bad outcome. Indeed, that would be a preferred outcome for some on this
Committee.
On the other hand, if we failed to tighten when it would have been appropriate to
do so, the excess demand gap would open or widen and inflation could increase. We would
then face the Taylor Rule's triple whammy on the funds rate. We would have to raise the
funds rate to prevent the real rate from declining, to counter the rise in output relative to
potential, and to combat the increase in inflation relative to our target. This is usually an
ugly affair. It does not end well for the economy.
Mr. Chairman, because I am guided by a forward-looking specification of the
Taylor Rule, because I believe we should be flexible in adjusting interest rates to changing
economic developments, because I think we should enforce an upward-sloping LM curve in
response to shifts in the IS curve, and because it is a maxi/min solution, I support your
recommendation for tightening monetary policy. Because containing a threat to higher
inflation is likely to require some further increase in short-term rates beyond the small

3/25/97
change contemplated today, I could have accepted a call for an asymmetric directive. I think
that is particularly true given that your comments raised the possibility, if not the likelihood,
of a move between now and the next meeting. That sounds like an asymmetric directive to
me. But I do not see that as a very important point, and I can certainly accept your scenario.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think that the
best thing to concentrate on at the moment, or at least what I find myself concentrating on, is
what we do not know. Even though we have had a lot of rather good albeit partial
explanations, I think we are not, and certainly I am not, altogether sure why inflation and the
cost-push causes of inflation have been so benevolent. We are tightening now largely
because we as a group have decided--and certainly I believe--that the risks of waiting further
have become excessive and therefore unacceptable. Then the question arises as to how much
we should tighten. I think 25 basis points does two things. It indicates our concern,
especially given the fact that a shift in policy direction is involved, but it does not pretend
that we know more than we know. I, at least, am not so sure that the benign performance of
growth and inflation, which we have found acceptable since last July, is going to end soon.
Therefore, I think it is appropriate that our response be moderate and in that sense a 25 basis
point increase is enough. I believe a 50 basis point move would indicate a far greater
assurance regarding the end of the benign period--that it is more highly predictable and will
occur sooner--than I feel intellectually or in any other way.
The asymmetric directive--I think I have become almost the resident theologian on
what asymmetry means--is inappropriate now. I believe that the combination of a move
with asymmetry would cause us to fall into the same trap of assuming something that we do

3/25/97
not know. If, as is possible and not absolutely a no-brainer, we decide that we have to
increase the fed funds rate again either before the next meeting or at the next meeting, the
lack of asymmetry when we announce it in releasing the minutes the Thursday after the May
meeting will not be very important to anybody. Consequently, I think the 25 basis point
increase and a symmetric directive are most consistent with what we know and maybe more
importantly with what we do not know.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation on the federal
funds rate. Though I might prefer asymmetry, given your comments I would also support
symmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I can accept your recommendation. On
balance, I think the case for a larger move is stronger than indicated by others who have
spoken to this point. But I am satisfied with 1/4 point. It is a way of getting back into the
ballgame, so to speak, and reaffirming our longer-term commitment to price stability. I do
think, as you suggested, that this move very likely will not be our last and that we will have
to tighten further. And I see a good chance that the tightening may happen sooner rather than
later, perhaps before the May meeting. I hope we will move promptly if we need to do so.
In that context, I would prefer an asymmetric directive because I think the situation even
after a 1/4 point increase is still going to be asymmetric. The issue is not a deal breaker for
me, but I have more than a marginal preference for asymmetry.
If I could add one other hopefully preemptive point: In this situation, I think there
is some possibility the dollar could strengthen. I am not predicting that, but I think it is

3/25/97
possible. If it should, I hope we will resist the temptation to engage in any foreign exchange
market intervention because I think that would dilute the signal we want to send with this
move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I should mention that the estimated Taylor Rule,
which we use as a policy reaction function in our forecasting model and which I think is
preferable to the original Taylor formulation, suggests a gradual rise in the funds rate totaling
about 100 basis points, with the increases beginning in the second quarter and continuing
through the end of this year. The degree of tightening is very similar to the one assumed in
the tighter policy simulation in the Greenbook. According to our analysis, a path like this for
the funds rate appears necessary just to hold the line at around 3 percent on core CPI
inflation. It certainly is time to take an initial step in tightening policy. While I think the
case for a 50 basis point increase is stronger than you do, Mr. Chairman, I would support a
25 basis point increase to 5-1/2 percent. I also would strongly prefer to have language in the
directive that is asymmetric toward further tightening since I think that course of action is
likely to be appropriate in the future. It seems to me that there was very little, if any,
discussion around the table that would be consistent with a symmetric directive. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Mr. Chairman, as we all have said, we need to be
forward-looking in our policy, and I think a rate of inflation as high as the forecast we have
seen today is clearly unacceptable. Just looking at the Greenbook forecast of a core inflation
rate of 3.2 percent by 1998, that rate would increase to 3.6 percent if we added back the BLS
methodological changes. Although this forecast has not changed since our last meeting, I

3/25/97
think we are more confident about the forecast today than we were then because of the
persisting strength in the economy and because of other changes in the forecast, as Larry
Meyer pointed out in his comments. Therefore, I clearly support your recommendation for
the 25 basis point increase, and I prefer 25 basis points to 50 basis points for the reasons that
you explained. I would prefer an asymmetrical directive, but I do not feel strongly enough
about it to dissent on that issue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, I fully support your recommendation for both the
25 basis points and the symmetric directive. I, like many others, could support an
asymmetric directive as well, but I think your wisdom in this case is good as usual.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. I support a 25 basis point increase. We ought to explain this
tightening action by indicating that we think we will increase the chances of prolonging the
expansion by moving now. We central bankers ought to like job creation; we ought to like
growth; we ought to like prosperity, and I think we ought to explain our actions in the context
of favoring those things. Indeed, if we have learned anything, it is that low inflation is
pro-growth rather than anti-growth. With regard to the symmetry issue, I think the choice of
symmetry or asymmetry is based on a flexible theology. It seems to play different roles at
different meetings, and I do not have strong feelings one way or the other. But I think your
rationale is as good as any, Mr. Chairman, so I would vote for symmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stem.
MR. STERN. I am generally comfortable with your recommendation, Mr.
Chairman. I do not want to dwell on too many nuances, but let me just make a couple of

3/25/97
additional comments. Like President Broaddus, if I interpreted him correctly, I guess I am
somewhat less confident than you that we are not behind the curve. My concern is that there
seems to be a lot of momentum to demand in the economy, and that momentum could
translate into rising inflationary pressures. While I agree with your assessment that we
probably have been underestimating productivity growth for some time, I wonder how
widespread that mismeasurement is and what the prospects for productivity are going
forward. Mike Prell's report on the dichotomy between the views of the banker and the
industrialist is perhaps a little indicative. There is no doubt that the productivity increases
have been substantial in manufacturing, but people in the financial services industry at least
implicitly suggest that they have not achieved the same kind of gains. I think that is one of
the reasons they have not quite bought into the "new era" story the way others have.
Having said that, I think that when we make policy adjustments like this, it pays to
be cautious. We are uncertain about the outlook; we are uncertain about the effectiveness of
policy; and because of those uncertainties, I think we ought to be cautious. As I said, I am
comfortable with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. I, too, am comfortable with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
I came to this meeting with a preference for an asymmetrical directive, and even after the
discussion, I still have a slight preference for that. But you and others have argued very
persuasively that it is not a big deal in present circumstances, so I am comfortable with a
symmetrical directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.

3/25/97
MS. PHILLIPS. I support your recommendation to tighten 25 basis points. I am
not sure how much tightening ultimately is going to be needed, but caution seems appropriate
when we change the direction of policy. I support a 25 basis point move. At 5-1/2 percent,
we may not be that far out of alignment, so symmetry seems like the right message to me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
MR. MELZER. Alan, I agree with what you said in terms of the likelihood of
more tightening down the road. I think we will need to do more, and I might be inclined to
do more at this point, but I can accept your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support the 25 basis points and I support the
symmetrical directive on its merits.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. We are now entering the seventh year of the expansion as dated
by the National Bureau. For the most part, it has been an extraordinary expansion in that not
only has inflation been contained, but more importantly it has tended to drift down through
this expansion period, which is remarkable. Last summer when Fed watchers--Wall Street
types especially--were certain that we were not only going to raise rates then but that a tighter
policy was needed, I was comfortable in not supporting that view. I felt from a
forward-looking perspective that we would continue to get productivity increases, downward
pressure on inflation, and a concurrent decline in the unemployment rate. People's
perception about capacity and how much slack existed would be changing, which allowed us
the luxury of leaving the nominal funds rate where it was and not incurring any trouble. But
I also was counting on not having an acceleration in the growth of nominal final demand.

3/25/97
For quite a while we had been in a period where the successive Greenbook surprises were in
the direction of lower nominal spending growth than previously forecast. Not only was
inflation lower, but nominal spending growth and domestic final demand growth were lower.
Even as recently as the December Greenbook--a week or two away from the end of the
quarter--we were looking at a fairly modest growth rate of nominal spending of under 5
percent for the fourth quarter.
Of course, it did not turn out that way. It came in much, much stronger. But then
in the February Greenbook we still were looking at the reported strength in the fourth quarter
as having been a one-time occurrence associated with such things as seasonals, weather, and
the trade sector. Now we are looking at a situation where nominal spending growth
accelerated very sharply in the final two quarters of the sixth year of this expansion and,
more important in some ways, where the domestic component of final demand accelerated in
those two quarters. All of that may turn out to have been a one-time thing, and spending
growth may decelerate significantly from these levels. But when we look at virtually every
measure of money and credit, the monetary base, Ml, MZM, and so on, not only for this
country but around the world, we find that such money growth rates have accelerated
sharply. That says to me that the world's central banks are financing an acceleration in final
demand and that monetary policy could very quickly come to be viewed as being behind the
curve and require a lot of adjustment to make sure that money growth does not start sprouting
out in higher inflation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have acceptance of 25 basis points and--I'm
sorry. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Ditto. [Laughter]

3/25/97
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ditto what?
MR. MCTEER. I agree with your recommendation, and I also agree with
Governor Rivlin and Ed Boehne on the pro-growth rhetoric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I knew I was missing an important voice.
MR. MCTEER. If you want, I will tell you an Aggie joke! [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. We don't have time for that!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is a marginal consensus toward symmetry as
the first choice. Therefore, I will ask your vote on 25 basis points with symmetry.
MR. BERNARD. The directive wording is from page 12 of the Bluebook: "In the
implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to increase slightly
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions. In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, slightly greater reserve
restraint or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with some moderation in
the expansion of M2 and M3 over coming months."
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Broaddus
President Guynn
Governor Kelley
Governor Meyer
President Moskow
President Parry
Governor Phillips
Governor Rivlin

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

3/25/97
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Given the possibility that we would do this, I
already have a draft of what we may want to announce. I will read the whole draft
announcement.
"The Federal Open Market Committee decided today to tighten money market
conditions slightly, expecting the federal funds rate to rise about 1/4 percentage point to
around 5-1/2 percent.
This action was taken in light of persisting strength in demand, which has
progressively increased the risk of inflationary imbalances developing that would eventually
undermine the long expansion.
In these circumstances, the slight firming of monetary conditions is viewed as a
prudent step that affords greater assurance of continuing the current low inflation
environment for the rest of this year and next and prolonging the economic expansion. The
experience of the last several years has reinforced the conviction that low inflation is
essential to realizing the economy's fullest growth potential.
No change was made in the Federal Reserve discount rate, which remains at 5
percent."
Is that acceptable to everybody? I would put it out in the name of the Committee
because this is such an important document. I hope you do not mind in this context.
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, one suggestion for your consideration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.
MR. KELLEY. About two sentences from the bottom, you list inflation first and
growth second. I would suggest reversing the order in which you say those two things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me think about whether the grammar holds.

3/25/97
MR. KELLEY. We have to do that for sure.
MS. RIVLIN. I had the same reaction. It was a little heavy on inflation, and since
we do not have any, I don't think we want to be stressing that quite so much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You favor reversing the order in that sentence?
MS. RIVLIN. Yes, or some other verbal means of emphasizing growth a little
more, inflation a little less.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is the reason the previous sentence says in part
"and prolonging the economic expansion." It was meant to capture that thought.
MS. RIVLIN. It is there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me see if it creates grammatical monstrosities to
reverse the sequence in the last sentence.
Let me remind everybody that we are going to lunch to say our best departing
words to Janet Yellen, and a lot of people will be there who do not have access to what we
have done. The announcement will not be released until 2:15 p.m. Please be particularly
careful in observing this central bank confidence. It may or may not be crucial, but it would
be awful to find that somebody picked up something and it got out prior to the 2:15 p.m.
release to the press. Also, as Joe Coyne will tell you, we have a rule about not commenting
about what we have done during the next week. I merely emphasize that.
We have no further business except to note that our next meeting is on May 20.
See you all at lunch. Lunch is at 1:00 p.m.?
MR. BERNARD. At 1:00 p.m.
END OF MEETING

