Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 30, 1997
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, September 30,
1997, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
Mr. McDonough, Vice Chairman
Mr. Broaddus
Mr. Guynn
Mr. Kelley
Mr. Moskow
Mr. Meyer
Mr. Parry
Ms. Phillips
Ms. Rivlin
Messrs. Hoenig, Jordan, Melzer, and Ms. Minehan, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and Minneapolis
respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Messrs. Cecchetti, Goodfriend, Eisenbeis, Hunter, Lindsey, Promisel,
Siegman, Slifman, and Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Fisher, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors

9/30/97

2
Messrs. Madigan and Simpson, Associate Directors, Divisions of
Monetary Affairs and Research and Statistics respectively,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Alexander, Hooper, and Ms. Johnson, Associate Directors,
Division of International Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Varvel, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Ms. Browne, Messrs. Dewald, Hakkio, Ms. Krieger, Messrs. Lang,
Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, St. Louis, Kansas City, New
York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, and Cleveland
respectively
Mr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
September 30, 1997
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. Would somebody like to move
approval of the minutes for the August 19 meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Peter Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I will be referring to the
four pages of colored charts in front of you under the Class II cover. 1On
the first page are current 3-month deposit rates and 3-, 6-, and 9-month
forward, 3-month deposit rates that for the United States are shown in red,
for Germany in blue, and for Japan in green. Looking at the U.S. forward
rates, you can see that there has been relatively little net change since the
Committee's last meeting. Indeed, after rising during August, the forward
rates are now back to around their levels at the time of the August meeting
and almost back to the recent lows they reached at the very end of July.
The single biggest decline in U.S. forward rate expectations came on the
release of the August CPI on September 16. That followed a smaller
decline the prior day after the retail sales and the PPI data for August were
announced. Looking at these rates going back to late March and given their
recent declines, I see relatively little, if any, pricing in of expected further
action by the Committee in the months ahead.
Looking down to the German forward rates shown in blue, you can see
that the rise in German rate expectations that began earlier in the summer
has continued. While both German and some other European data have
been somewhat firmer, I believe the bigger impact on German rate
expectations has come from the rather loud whisper campaign that the
Bundesbank has directed at financial markets. The message in effect is that
in order for the European monetary union to work, German and Italian
short-end rates will have to meet somewhere in between their current levels.
With the German short-end rates now around 3 percent and Italian shortend rates around 6 to 6-1/2 percent, this implies a 150 basis point rise for
Germany and a 150 basis point decline for Italy. The rather public whisper
campaign has been driving German rate expectations up, and you can
observe on the right side of the chart the rather pronounced upward shift
following the ECOFIN meeting the weekend of September 13 and 14.
Looking at the Japanese forward rates in the bottom panel, you can see
that the various forward rate maturities have continued to collapse on top of
1 Copies of the charts used by Mr. Fisher are appended to this document (Appendix 1).

9/30/97

2

the current rate. The release of the 11.2 percent (annual rate) decline in
second-quarter GDP added to the gloom in Tokyo. Rather than try to parse
out the green muddle of rates at the bottom of the chart, let me observe that
the 9-month forward, 3-month yen deposit rate now trades at 3 basis points
over the overnight Libor rate. The JGB benchmark yield has traded down
to 1.86 percent in the last couple of days. These relative shifts in interest
rate expectations have had a fairly predictable impact on exchange markets,
with the yen depreciating about 2-1/2 percent and the mark appreciating
about 5-1/2 percent against the dollar since August 1. I think this impact on
the dollar-mark exchange rate is precisely what the Bundesbank had in
mind when it engineered its whisper campaign.

Turning to the second page, you can see that recent developments had a
somewhat more complex impact on bond markets. The four panels on this
page depict the basis-point changes since July 1 in 9-month forward
3-month deposit rates implied by the FRAs and in 10-year government
bond yields. In the upper left panel, you can see the story of U.S. interest
rate markets as the red lines move across the chart. We had the rally in July
followed by the upward spike in early August. There was little net change
subsequently until the more recent rally associated with the release of the
August price data during September. In the top panel for Japan on the right,
the persistent decline in Japanese rates, both for 10-year bonds and forward
interest rate expectations, is evident. In the bottom left chart for Germany,
we see a different pattern of interest rate movements throughout the period.
The 9-month forward 3-month deposit rate has risen by 72 basis points
since July 1, while the 10-year bond has traded more or less sideways; it
rallied a little in September, declining 18 basis points in yield.
The truly dramatic impact of the Bundesbank's whisper campaign was
felt in Italian interest rate markets where participants heard the Bundesbank
to be saying three things: First, the Bundesbank would be raising rates.
Secondly, the Bundesbank was so convinced that Italy would be in EMU
that they were prepared to act on that basis. And third, the Bundesbank
thought it would be an EMU-friendly act for the Bank of Italy to lower rates
150 basis points. As shown in the panel at the bottom right, the 9-month
forward 3-month lira deposit rate declined by 125 basis points from the
beginning of August through last Friday and there was a similar decline in
the 10-year bond yield. One of the questions that have come out of this
experience is how to explain the stability in long-term German interest
rates. From Frankfurt, the markets have heard that when central banks with
real credibility threaten to raise rates, the long end of their yield curve

9/30/97

remains stable or rallies. And much to my surprise, a great number of
market participants have adopted this view as their own. There is an
alternative view to which I am somewhat partial. It begins by noting that
over the last several years the Bundesbank has been of the view that the
long end of their yield curve has followed the lead of the U.S. and the
global bond markets, and it has not really followed expected changes in
short-term German interest rates. The pattern of the solid blue line for
Germany does have some echo of the solid red line for the United States.
One could also note that relative to U.S. and Japanese 10-year rates,
German rates have backed up by 25 basis points since the beginning of the
summer. So, I think there is some excitement yet to play through in
European bond markets as we move forward toward EMU.
The third page of charts shows percent changes in equity indices for the
second and third quarters of 1997. I have included that chart to make two
obvious points. First, equity markets were somewhat more volatile in the
third quarter than in the second. Also, there was a much greater diversity of
outcomes in the third quarter. That is true globally and also if we look at
some of the internal comparisons. For example, the NASDAQ performance
was quite different from that of the Dow. The Milan MlBtel, the German
Dax, and the French CAC all had quite different outcomes and, of course,
the Tokyo Topix and its construction sector, reflecting the Japanese
domestic economy, also turned in rather different performances than other
equity indices.
Turning to domestic open market operations, the daily effective federal
funds rate averaged about 5.55 percent over the intermeeting period, a little
higher than the intended rate. This outcome reflected principally a few
days of elevated funds rates. I'm not going to take you through all the
detail on these charts, but I did want to make a point. The vertical blue
lines in the top panel show the daily range of federal funds trading; the
horizontal red lines are the daily effective rate; the vertical red lines
represent one standard deviation in the volume of federal funds trading each
day and give a sense of the concentration or dispersion of funds trading.
The middle panel shows our misses, that is, the actual level of free reserves
less the intended level; the yellow bars indicate negative misses and the
blue bars show positive misses. In the bottom panel, you see operating
balances as they occurred each day.
My reason for showing this chart is to focus on three days in September
on the right hand side of the page--the 15th , 16 th, and 17th--and to point out
that neither changes in operating balances alone nor even our misses of
some size really tell us everything we might want know about what drives
volatility in the federal funds market. The 15th, 16th, and 17th were
corporate tax payment dates. On the 15th, you can see that we had an
elevated effective rate on the day but a very narrow effective range, as

9/30/97

market participants priced up for the pressures they anticipated and traded
funds in a very narrow range. However, looking at the middle panel for the
15th , we had a rather sizable miss of $2 billion on that day. Even so, we had
a relatively contained federal funds rate. On the 16th , the effective rate was
right on the target at 5-1/2 percent. The one standard deviation trading
range was somewhat wider on that day, but we again had a miss and, if you
look at the bottom of the page, a very low operating balance. In fact, we
almost hit the historic low operating balance, but we did not have a terribly
volatile day or upward pressure in the funds market. The next day, the 17 th,
funds traded over a quite wide range at rates up to 15 percent and the one
standard deviation volume of trading was much wider. We had a very large
miss and again a low operating balance.
The difference between the 16th and the 17th was in the distribution of
reserves, with the need falling on the large regional banks whose behavior
pattern tends to be to bid up the funds rate. So in this case, the behavior of
those banks determined the volatility of the funds rate a great deal more
than the level of operating balance or even the size of our miss. I do not
want to overstate that, but I think it is a significant point to emphasize. The
level of the operating balance is not the only factor.
Since your last meeting, we have conducted two legs of outright
purchase operations, both in the coupon sector. The bill market remains
quite tight, and I have been reluctant to enter that market. So, I expect to
continue to operate in the coupon market. There is some possibility that
with the new fiscal year the Treasury will be issuing a larger amount of bills
and we will be able to return to bill purchases.
Mr. Chairman, there were no foreign exchange operations for the
System account during the period since the August meeting. I will need the

Committee's ratification of our domestic open market operations. I would
be happy to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Peter?
MR. BROADDUS. A quick question, Peter. It seems to me that our key concern about
intra-day funds rate volatility would be the possibility that we would give the wrong signal to
markets. I have not had the sense that anything like that has been happening lately, but you may
have a different impression.
MR. FISHER. No, I do not. I think the market understands as well as any of us the
implications of low operating balances and how they may foster market volatility on some days.

9/30/97

So, no, I don't think such volatility has had any effect on policy expectations. Don and I have
worried that it might at some point. I don't want to make too much of this, but we are making an
effort to refine our ability to measure volatility so that we can provide the Committee with a better
basis for judging and deciding whether this is something it should care about.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter, the numbers look quite good in terms of confirming
your hypothesis about the rate objectives of the Bundesbank and the Bank of Italy. I had always
thought that the Bank of Italy, specifically the Italian government, would have been far more
interested in having their rates converge with the German rates at the bottom of the maturity curve
because, as you know, their budget is financed through short-term instruments and lower short-term
rates would do wonders for their fiscal position. Nonetheless, I suspect that the implication of the
German action, which is essentially saying that they will not resist Italy's joining the EMU, may be
the real driving force here. Have you spoken to anybody at the Bank of Italy to get a sense of
whether in fact they were focusing more on German acquiescence in Italy's EMU entrance or
whether they were in a sense somewhat disturbed by the fact that the Germans seemed to be
pushing their rates up?
MR. FISHER. I have spoken with people at the Bank of Italy, the Bank of France, and
some other European central banks. For the Italians, there is a hierarchy of objectives. Getting into
EMU is the first, the second, and the third objective! So, I think they are prepared to pay some
price for EMU membership. If they cannot get their rates all the way down to match German rates,
they are prepared to go half-way. Now, most people in the market anticipate another interest rate
reduction from the Bank of Italy once the Italian budget passes. I believe that may occur in coming
weeks, and there may be one or even two Bank of Italy actions before year-end in light of the
Bundesbank's implicit announcement that short rates ought to converge somewhere in the middle.

9/30/97

The Bundesbank's comments fell on very fertile ground in the markets. They seemed to be waiting
to see when something might happen, and they got a pre-blessing out of Frankfurt. It seems clear
that people in Europe wanted to see rates converge on the low German rates and felt a certain
reluctance to suggest that the convergence be somewhere in the middle of current rate levels. On
the plus side, one reason the German action can be seen as positive is that it is creating a greater
flexibility for the new ECB when it comes in. People previously had been assuming that the ECB
would simply pick up whatever repo rate was set by the Bundesbank and that would be that. This
has introduced an element of uncertainty.
On the other hand, I think the French are the ones who will really feel they have been
misled. They went through the pain of getting their rates all the way down and having them
converge on the low German rates. Now they hear that they will have to suffer the pain of going
half-way up to meet Italian rate levels, and they do not think that was the understanding. That is
painful for them. There are two ways to think about this "meet-in-the-middle" story. One is in
terms of mood music: it sets a positive tone and gets the process going. But if it is taken literally, I
think it can be quite toxic. You can fix exchange rates and let interest rates float or you can fix
interest rates at the short end and let exchange rates float. Trying to fix both in advance of the
EMU event is a high-wire act.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Any other questions for Peter? If not, would
someone like to move to ratify the domestic operations?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. So move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We turn now to Mike Prell.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It would not surprise me if
many of you found the tale of the staff forecast in the Greenbook more
tortuous than usual. Preparing the forecast and then writing it up proved to
be a considerable struggle for us this time.

9/30/97

Perhaps we engaged in more soul-searching than was really required,
but we found ourselves with what seemed like a complex task. We had to
contend with the fact that as we were at work, financial markets appeared to
be in the grip of new era fever and stock prices were moving ever further
above, and bond yields ever further below, where we had anticipated they
would be. We also had to explain why we were raising our forecast of nearterm growth again, as well as why we thought moderation would yet be
coming. And we had to explain why, though we were lowering our inflation
forecast again, we still expected prices to accelerate in coming quarters. I
will try to run through some of the highlights of our thinking as quickly as
possible this morning.
First, on the new era, we do not have any problem with the notion that
a good many things have changed in the world. There have been some
marvelous technological advances that offer the potential for productivity
gains. The emergence of new market economies around the world has
unlocked vast amounts of underutilized labor resources. There has been a
lowering of barriers to international trade and capital flows. There have been
gains in competition and efficiency through domestic deregulation and
restructuring. Also, today's labor market is marked by less unionization and
by more flexible approaches to compensation.
Of course, one may observe that these phenomena generally involve
rather gradual processes, most of which have been in train for some time, but
perhaps there has been some harmonic convergence that is yielding
magnified effects recently. In any event, the practical question is what to
make of these observations when we attempt to prepare a forecast that may
be helpful in framing monetary policy. The new era advocates say the
economy can grow faster, with lower unemployment, without generating
inflation. If they are simply talking about higher trend productivity growth
or lower NAIRUs, this doesn't suggest the need for a new analytical
paradigm. But they sometimes seem to be claiming that aggregate supply
and demand will always be in non-inflationary sync, even if the
government's statistics do not always show it. Monetary policy seemingly is
irrelevant in this self-regulating state of perfection. You can dump the staff
and take an indefinite vacation. [Laughter]
If I were not well shy of retirement eligibility, I might be more
receptive to this view. But, I suspect that most of you share at least some of
our skepticism. Under the circumstances, we feel much more comfortable
taking the most relevant and persuasive aspects of the new era view and
incorporating them in our model--one in which supply-demand imbalances
can occur and give rise to inflationary pressures that can be modulated by
monetary policy. This is, in effect, what we have been doing all along.

9/30/97

So, with that prologue, what tendencies do we think are facing you in
the economy today? As you know, we believe the economy is still running
pretty hot. Exports have been zipping along with remarkable strength. And,
though last Thursday's report on capital goods orders was a bit weaker than
we anticipated, it didn't undermine our assessment that this sector of the
economy is still on a steep uptrend, paced by demand for computers and
communications equipment but with fairly substantial demand elsewhere,
too. The growth of these sectors and the massive gains in stock market
wealth are providing consumers with the wherewithal to spend, and they are
doing so. Indeed, judging by yesterday's monthly PCE release, they are
doing so to an even greater degree than we thought. In light of those figures
and the other late-arriving data, we would now place likely third-quarter
GDP growth in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range.
We continue to think that the levels of some types of household and
business investment expenditures are high enough that stocks might soon
begin to get out of kilter with income and output trends if there is not some
deceleration in inventory accumulation. And we believe the rise of the dollar
has been large enough to damp export growth and raise import penetration
further in the period ahead. But, these are far from a sure thing--certainly in
terms of timing and dimension.
Booms generate a momentum of their own, and like others, this one is
being supported by a degree of financial exuberance. In fact, it is our
assessment that, more likely than not, financial restraint sufficient to rein in
the excess demand we see will be achieved only with a decisive enough
monetary policy jolt to shake the market's current euphoria. Whether the
percentage point hike in the funds rate in the forecast is the right dose, we
obviously do not know for sure, but if our analysis is correct, something
noticeable probably will be required.
The other part of the analysis is, of course, our judgment that we can't
depend on productivity increases large enough to sustain such rapid growth
of output and that the Phillips curve is not dead. It is somewhat disfigured,
perhaps, but not dead. On the productivity front, as we suggested in the
Greenbook, there may well be room for optimism regarding the outlook for
growth in output per hour. Among other things, despite all the complaints
about the quality of available workers, measured productivity performance
has improved of late. We are skeptical of the new era view that firms always
have another productivity trick up their sleeves to offset any cost increase-but it could be that the high-tech investments are now having a more
significant payoff, and we have taken a somewhat more optimistic view of
productivity prospects.
As for the Phillips curve, we believe that compensation practices
probably have changed in ways that may temper the short-run response of

9/30/97
overall pay structures to tight labor markets. On top of that consideration, we
also have the apparent divergence of the degrees of labor and factory
utilization. This might be viewed as part of the new era--the perfectly elastic
and immediate supply of plant and equipment as needed to meet demand.
Our projection of moderate capacity utilization argues, we think, for some
restraint on inflation relative to what might be implied by labor market
conditions. Similarly, in the near term, the legacy of recent low inflation and
a seeming convergence of expectations on continued low inflation bodes
well for the sustained moderation of compensation increases.
How far to carry these arguments in recalibrating one's model of the
inflation process is a difficult judgment call. We do not think they eliminate
entirely the risk of an upturn of inflation if labor markets remain as taut as
they are now, let alone get tighter, as we are projecting. Moreover, there are
a couple of other special factors that reinforce the likelihood of a steeper rise
in prices going forward.
One of them is the possibility that employers will face significant
increases in premiums for health insurance. In this regard, I might note that,
at the end of last week, it was announced that the premiums in the Federal
Employees Health Benefit program will be rising an average of 8-1/2 percent
next year. We have not had the opportunity to research this development
adequately, so I am not sure that this is a clear sign that the pressures in this
sphere will be greater than we anticipated in our forecast. It is a worry,
however.
Finally, in looking at the inflation outlook, we think it is important to
consider the prospects for the dollar. Estimates of the effects of the dollar
appreciation and the associated decline in import prices vary considerably,
but they certainly have been a significant factor tending to trim domestic
inflation in the past year or two. An advocate of the new era might say that a
strong dollar is just a natural and lasting result of the reaccommodation of
the United States in the world economy, but with the probability of a
growing external deficit, we find it hard to swallow the concept that we
should be anticipating another 20 percent rise in the dollar over the next two
years. It could happen, but we are betting against it. Without that influence
--indeed, with the possibility of some reversal of the dollar--containing
inflation is going to be more difficult.
Toting up all these considerations, we have core inflation accelerating
only a couple of tenths per year through 1999 despite continuous sub-fivepercent unemployment. That rate is, to be sure, damped a couple of tenths
by technical changes to the CPI. But, especially given the expected
abatement of favorable exchange rate effects, the forecast does fall
somewhat short of what might normally have been anticipated simply on the
basis of the excess demand for labor--say, if one simply applied a

9/30/97
conventional "sacrifice ratio" to the unemployment gap relative to a 5-1/2
percent NAIRU.
We think that we have been judicious in adapting to the incoming
evidence and in taking account of alternative explanations for the surprises
we have experienced. In the end, despite our flirtation with the new era
view, our forecast conveys a rather clear message that the risks are tilted
toward higher inflation in the absence of some restrictive policy action. But,
I would have to say that this is truly a period in which the outlook is
characterized by the proverbial "unusual degree" of uncertainty.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mike?
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. I think Mike's oral presentation adds a good deal
of clarity to the ideas behind the Greenbook forecast. There are a couple of things there, however,
that strike me as somewhat inconsistent, and perhaps you could clarify this for me or the rest of us.
We have a rather high real interest rate now and that rate makes carrying inventory expensive. This
may be one of the reasons why inventories have been kept rather low. If we cranked up the federal
funds rate by 100 basis points as assumed in the Greenbook forecast, we would have a real interest
rate of about 4 percent and that would make carrying inventories hugely expensive. I would like
your view of the likelihood that such an increase in the real rate would bring about a much greater
inventory correction than you have in the forecast.
The other thing that strikes me as somewhat inconsistent is the relationship in the
forecast between the 20 percent correction in the stock market and the behavior of long-term
interest rates. I think that if you assume any kind of wealth effect coming from an "I-am-scared-todeath" 20 percent correction in stock prices, especially if the latter were to occur relatively quickly,
the flow of funds would be from the stock market into the bond market and instead of the long-term
interest rates going up as in the forecast, I think one might expect them to come down. Those are
the two things in the forecast that appear to me to be somewhat inconsistent.

9/30/97

MR. PRELL. Those are very interesting questions. Perhaps the relatively high real rate
of interest in recent years, particularly if it is measured in terms of the prices of goods, say the PPI,
may have something to do with why we see a downtrend in inventory-sales ratios. Another factor,
of course, is the better information systems that firms have to work with. Going forward, we do
project a substantial deceleration of inventory investment from what we have been seeing recently.
The level of the inventory-sales ratio remains historically low in our forecast. I think firms will still
find that markets are not so loose, even given our capacity utilization numbers, that they feel they
can avoid the need to have some precautionary stocks on hand. But, yes, there is always the
potential, especially when we are anticipating that final demand will be decelerating and perhaps
surprisingly so over the coming year, that inventories will get out of line at least temporarily. That
would lead initially to a period of somewhat greater inventory accumulation than we have in the
forecast but that would be followed by a swing down toward a much lower rate of accumulation,
and it would introduce a bit of a cycle into the outlook. Whether inventories in our forecast are too
high on an average basis given these real interest rates is an interesting question. I don't think I
have much more that I can add on this question. It is certainly something that we are aware of.
On the stock market correction question, there is something of a chicken and egg
problem. The same sort of thought has occurred to me; we may have some shifting of the risk
premia in the market. But there is a consistency in the forecast, at least in the sense that one reason
why we anticipate the stock market decline is the rise in interest rates. That rise will require a
higher discount rate in the stock market valuation formula. If we did not get that interest rate
adjustment at least initially, we wonder whether the negative earning surprises would be enough to
create this kind of decline in stock prices. So, it may be a timing issue; we may see some swings
involving a flight to security and to fixed-income instruments. It is not inconceivable that the

9/30/97
enthusiasm about prospective stock market returns has been a factor that in essence has raised
yields across the board on various types of financial instruments. Why would I invest in a bond
that yielded only 4 percent when I think I can get a much higher return in the stock market? If the
expected returns in the stock market go down, perhaps we will also have some effect on the bond
market. But I think we would see this in significant measure as a change in the equity premium in
the stock market so that people will require a higher expected return relative to those on bonds.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I think you answered my question in part, Mike. It also relates to the
Greenbook assumptions of a one hundred basis point tightening in 1998 and a 20 percent stock
market correction. My specific question was whether you are assuming that same stock market
correction in the "no change" scenario. More generally, is the stock market correction independent
of the course of monetary policy?
MR. PRELL. The "no change" scenario that we have included in that model simulation
clearly would imply a higher level of stock prices than in our baseline forecast. That better stock
market performance results from the strength of the economy that helps to sustain profits, and it
works through the discount factor in stock price valuations. So, the wealth effects are more
favorable to consumer demand in the alternative stable interest rate scenario. Our feeling is that
there is certainly the potential, simply on the basis of disappointment in earnings growth, for stock
prices to fall off some. We see the tightening of policy, and the shift in expectations that that
causes--and the related tendency for bond yields to back up--as an important factor in explaining
the timing and dimension of the stock market decline we have in the forecast.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.

9/30/97

MR. PARRY. Mike, the ECI forecast in the Greenbook has an increase of just a couple
of tenths over the forecast period. There is reference in the Greenbook to the fact that the
increasing role of bonuses and other incentive payments may be having some influence in
moderating measured increases in employment costs. You mentioned in your oral presentation that
medical premiums may be rising significantly. We, too, hear a lot about the possibility that
medical premiums will be going up considerably in 1998. It seems to me that in your ECI forecast
there is almost an implicit flat-to-down path for wage and salary increases. Do you think the risks
are fairly symmetrical in that forecast? Are there factors that I am not taking into account that
could moderate the increase in medical premiums? The latter seems likely to be very large.
MR. PRELL. Let me mention a couple of things: One, we did build in only mild
accelerations in wages and salaries and in total benefits, and we incorporated a rather modest
upturn in the cost of medical benefits relative to some of the stories we have heard. To some
extent, we have to consider whether we are looking at the gross increase in the cost of the medical
benefits or whether they are the net cost the employer is going to incur. Certainly, many larger
companies in the last year or two have been talking about how their philosophy has shifted to
viewing the health insurance benefit as a defined contribution arrangement rather than as a defined
benefit. So, they are looking for ways to pass along the rising cost to the employees by restricting
benefits or increasing the out-of-pocket expenses that the employees will experience. In light of the
seeming confirmation of some of the scarier stories and the recent federal employee health benefits
announcement, our faith is a little shaken that we have allowed for enough of an increase. I would
say that we do not see compelling evidence that one should write the step-up off as something that
will be offset through lower wage increases. The evidence that that will be the pattern in the short

9/30/97
run is rather shaky. In this tight labor market, I think there is a clear risk of more overall
compensation inflation than we are projecting.
The final point I would make is that, in this forecast, as measured in product prices--and
we think this highly relevant--the increases in compensation are sizable in real terms and they are
growing faster than trend productivity. So, in this model, workers are doing reasonably well
because of the benefits of low price inflation. Now, whether this is the dynamic that will prevail in
this kind of environment is a matter of conjecture. We have been struck to date by how, in the face
of lots of stories about tight labor markets and employers undertaking to pay particular workers
more in one way or another, we really have not seen an acceleration in labor costs. It may be just
around the corner, and we may have to reverse course in the sequence of revisions we have been
making in the forecast.
MR. PARRY. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. Thank you. I always pay special attention to September Greenbooks
because they give us that extra year in the forecast horizon to think about.
MR. PRELL. I might just remark that since this is the first time we have formally done a
forecast for 1999, it probably is a little shakier than it might otherwise be.
MR. JORDAN. But September forecasts are nonetheless useful. A year ago in
September, I looked at the projections and noted that nominal spending was increasing at a rate of
around 4-1/2 percent and not much progress was being made in the direction of reduced growth.
This forecast pulls down nominal spending growth by a full percentage point by the end of 1998
compared to the previous forecast, but it also runs growth out in 1999 at a rate of around 3-1/2
percent. I find that interesting, but I need to know how it is coming about. As I understand it,

9/30/97

Mike, your baseline assumption is that starting perhaps 6 months or so from now the Committee
will raise the federal funds rate by 100 basis points over the course of next year, presumably in 1/4
percentage point steps. That is more of a total increase than you were previously assuming. I
would imagine that, as a general principle, the longer we delay taking any kind of policy action, the
more policy action you assume we will have to have to get the same result. In comparison with
your assumption of starting to raise the funds rate in 6 months to produce the Greenbook forecast
result, assuming we like that result, what kind of tradeoff in timing versus amount would you have
in mind if we started to tighten policy now? How much less of an increase in the funds rate might
we need in total to produce the same Greenbook forecast through 1999?
MR. PRELL. I do not have a model simulation in my pocket to give you a quantitative
answer to that. I think that a series of policy moves that raised the federal funds rate 100 basis
points by next March instead of one that only started to raise the funds rate next March would
probably lead to circumstances that would encourage the Committee to think about reversing
course by 1999. The reason would be to make sure that, as we moved out of 1999 and into 2000,
monetary policy was not holding down the level of output so much that more slack ultimately
would be created than was needed to achieve a gradual moderation in the expansion and a return to
a flat-to-descending inflation path. Another way of approaching this policy adjustment would be to
start the process earlier and move more gradually to get to the same point. You basically are
talking about shifting the process forward with about as sharp a total increase in the funds rate, and
I think that approach would create a greater likelihood that you would have the opportunity to
reverse course, say, in 1999.
MR. JORDAN. So your view is not that we do less in total, but that we would start to
reverse it sooner?

9/30/97
MR. PRELL. As a first approximation, I would conceive of that as a more likely
alternative in terms of nipping in the bud what we think is an incipient pickup in inflation. But we
recognize, harking back to President McDonough's remark, that the implied real interest rate at the
short end would be fairly high with a nominal federal funds rate of 6-1/2 percent. At that level,
some easing in policy might be warranted if and as the inflation rate was checked and the
perception was that the rate of inflation was clearly headed back down into the sub-3-percent
inflation zone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Jerry just asked the question I wanted to pose.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mike, the data of the last couple of months clearly have
been far stronger, especially in the manufacturing area, yet commodity prices have eased. Are we
being put in a position where, for forecast and model purposes, we are using wages and prices as
exogenous variables?
MR. PRELL. I'm not sure I understand that thought.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me take a step back. If you were to take the type of
macro environment we are looking at and you were trying to make up for a shortfall from your
earlier expectations, the numbers in such a forecast would, I suspect, be far stronger than the ones
that you have. So, in that regard the add factors are very dominant elements in the forecast. The
question that I am asking is whether these factors have become so large in recent forecasts that they
are in effect giving us an exogenous forecast of prices.
MR. PRELL. I'm not sure I conceive of it as exogenous. In a sense we are letting
bygones be bygones and not anticipating that the favorable inflation surprises have created some
pent-up inflationary pressure that is going to burst forth in the future. I am impressed by recent

9/30/97

commodity market developments. I looked at the charts the other day. I did see some indications
in copper markets of changing expectations that appeared to be associated with the problems in
Southeast Asia, and there may be some special stories elsewhere. However, when we look across
the breadth of the commodity markets, there really is no sign of general pressure in those markets.
If we look at these markets narrowly in terms of the domestic industrial picture, capacity utilization
rates are not extraordinarily high in most sectors. And where utilization is fairly high, as it is for
example in the steel industry, the businesses in question are drawing in a large volume of imports
and they have capacity coming on stream prospectively in such a way that there really does not
seem to be much pricing leverage. So, in the last few months we increasingly have given weight to
the sense that there really is not much pressure in the goods sector and that there is a lot of capacity
coming on line in the United States and in many instances abroad. In our view, worldwide
economic activity is not going to be so robust relative to capacity that we are going to have a lot of
pressures in the commodity markets. I do not see those markets as the source of more inflation
independently of what is going on more broadly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you are making the assumption that your model's
historical structure and its coefficients are essentially correct and you are letting bygones be
bygones, you will get a specific numerical forecast which follows from those two assumptions.
MR. PRELL. We are in a sense modifying some of the conditions in that model. When
we look at cycles historically, we see that capacity utilization has tended to move up as
unemployment has moved down. It is very hard to discern econometrically a separate role for
industrial capacity utilization as a measure of the underlying inflationary pressure. In the current
circumstance, the deviation of the capacity utilization rate from what we would predict given the
unemployment rate is becoming substantial.

9/30/97

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I gather that is true with the manufacturing unemployment
rate as well?
MR. PRELL. Probably. Those industry unemployment rates are a shaky proposition. I
must say I have not really looked at that.
CHAIRMAN CHAIRMAN. The last time we looked at this issue was a year or so ago,
and we saw the same problem for the total unemployment rate. It was not a sectoral phenomenon;
it was a divergence between the labor market and the facilities market.
MR. PRELL. Since manufacturers cannot produce without workers, the labor market is
still relevant here. We do hear, and there were some Beigebook comments, that at least in some
instances manufacturers were finding that they had to raise their wages in order to attract and retain
the workers they needed. But the system seems to be working in such a way that we think it
behooves us to give some weight to our expectation that capacity utilization is going to remain
relatively moderate. We think this will put some damper on what the pickup in inflation otherwise
would be going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. As Jack mentioned, most of the good questions already have been
asked. Mike, I know we have had an asymmetric risk picture in most of the recent Greenbook
forecasts and certainly in the way the Committee has approached setting its directives. Would you
say that the risks incorporated in this forecast are larger than they have been in earlier ones in terms
of the degree of "judiciousness" that has been used in interpreting some of the evidence?
MR. PRELL. One of the risks we repeatedly have pointed to and then last time said it
might not be such an asymmetric risk was the role of the stock market and the implications for
consumption. As you may recall, the revised national income accounts that we received after the

9/30/97

August meeting showed that the saving rate had fallen so that the wealth effect seemingly was
working the way one would have expected. We thought that somehow the world now was right
and that we had a grasp of its functioning. We were not quite so concerned as we had been about
the risk that we would suddenly find consumption surging in a belated response to the
accumulation of wealth. In the interim, the stock market has once again risen more than we
expected. The difference is not big, but it is there, and consumption expenditures are surpassing
even our expectation of a robust upturn in the third quarter. Going forward, I do not have the sense
that our forecast implies an asymmetry of risks in terms of aggregate demand being stronger or
weaker. But it makes me nervous that we keep making revisions in the same direction, and my
sense is that there really is a boom mentality at work in the economy today. The financial markets
are supplying ample credit to borrowers, and the ongoing appreciation of share prices, now more
concentrated in the smaller cap issues, is providing cheap equity capital for many companies. I
worry that these booming conditions may be even more strongly maintained than we have forecast.
But in terms of the nuts and bolts of putting this forecast together and the assumptions we have
made for deviations from what we think of as normal behavior over time, I don't think we have an
obvious tilt in the risks.
Let me add something that Don Kohn just whispered in my ear. We have helped, I think,
to balance these risks in a sense by changing the policy assumptions. As we talk about the changes
in the forecast, you should not overlook that we have incorporated in it a more stringent set of
policy actions.
MS. MINEHAN. In your alternate forecast scenario that involves no further change in
the federal funds rate, I wonder about that 2.6 percent GDP growth figure for 1998 which occurs
without the 100 basis point tightening. I think there is a lot of optimism in that forecast that growth

9/30/97

will slow on its own. Now, granted that this is not your forecast number, but in terms of trying to
balance off your actual forecast against a picture of what would happen if we did nothing, I think
you have a lot of windage in that "no change" scenario.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. Mike said a moment ago that he did not think that manufacturers could
produce without workers. I have heard that the factory of the future will only have a man and a
dog. The man is there to feed the dog. The dog is there to keep the man from touching the
equipment. [Laughter]
MS. MINEHAN. Well, we don't have to worry about our educational system!
MR. PRELL. I have heard that joke specifically pertaining to chip plants, an industry
joke.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It is called a high-tech shaggy dog story. Who would like
to start off the Committee discussion? President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Obviously the latest data, particularly including the latest inflation
report, are very favorable. Maybe it is time for me to stop worrying and join the celebration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don't you dare do that! [Laughter]
MR. BROADDUS. You need not worry. I'm still nervous, and I get the sense from the
questions and comments this morning that the staff and other people are as well. I am still nervous
partly because of what I hear in my District and because I have a sense that the foundation of all the
good news lately may be fragile.
As far as our District is concerned, it seems quite clear to me that regional economic
activity has strengthened appreciably over the period since our last meeting. Labor markets, which
were already tight, strike me as even tighter now than they were. I have heard some comments

9/30/97
recently suggesting that labor markets in much of our District are as tight as at any time since I
have been in the Federal Reserve. There is increasing concern about this among employers. We
hear this in a lot of comments, but I heard it especially loudly in the comments of the members of
our Small Business and Agriculture Advisory Council when they met a week ago. They spoke
about signing bonuses for middle level and even clerical entry-level workers. The owner of a
construction company talked about skyrocketing wages in his sector. The owner of a private
employment agency said that salaries for mid-level people have risen sharply over the last three
months. One of the members of the group said that the remaining labor pool in her region
consisted mostly of essentially unemployable people, and there were reports of construction
projects being stretched out for lack of even minimally qualified workers. So, our regional labor
markets are very tight. Elsewhere, we are hearing reports of overbuilding in the commercial real
estate sector. These reports are not universal across the District, but we hear that especially in the
southern part of the District there is overbuilding of hotels and office and commercial space for the
first time in some time.
Again, there currently seems to be a lot of steam in our District economy, but having said
all of this, let me acknowledge that we still are not hearing reports of significant price increases in
final goods and services. That condition, of course, is encouraging, but I wonder how long it can
last given the apparent robustness of business conditions in our region.
At the national level, I think we already recognize that the Greenbook's baseline
projections are quite optimistic. They call for continuing growth at a robust pace, a drop in the
unemployment rate to 4-1/2 percent, and an acceleration in core CPI inflation of only .2 percent
next year despite the absence of any firming action on our part until 1998. That is a rosy scenario,

9/30/97
but it is not an unreasonable one given what has been happening over the last year and half or so,
and it certainly could come to pass.
I think, however, that there are very substantial risks to this projection. Some of them
already have been mentioned today. I will focus on a couple that arise primarily from the
Greenbook assumption that we may wait until as late as next spring before tapping on the brakes.
First, the Greenbook is projecting that our assumed tightening in 1998 will contribute to a 20
percent decline in the stock market over the course of the year. Of course, we really do not know
where the market is going to be 6 months down the road, especially if we keep policy on hold until
then, or how strong the market reaction to our initial action may be, again especially if we wait
until as late as next spring before taking that action. I think there's a significant risk that the
reaction could be very negative. What worries me about that possibility is that concern about it
might incline us to wait longer before tightening further, and that could put us significantly behind
the curve. I would argue that something like that happened after the market break in 1987. If this
does happen, we will have to play catch-up the way we did back in 1988 and 1989. Obviously, that
would increase the risk of a recession. I recognize that is a speculative comment, but I do not think
it is far-fetched.
The second risk, perhaps in some ways the greater one, is that by waiting until late next
spring to tap the brakes, we risk being challenged by some sort of inflation scare. It could arise
from one of the incoming economic reports. Capacity utilization, domestically at least, is now
approaching the level that has been associated with rising inflation pressures in the past. So, the
good fortune and good luck we have had with the monthly core inflation reports may run out at
some point. In that kind of situation, I worry that public confidence in our ability to keep a lid on
inflation could diminish quite rapidly if we are seen as reacting to developments rather than

9/30/97

conditioning them. Some of you may have seen a TV commercial that advertises an upscale car by
saying that life is divided between drivers and passengers, suggesting that drivers are more content
than passengers because they are in control. I'm not sure that is always true on the highway; I
know it is not true on 1-95 where I would rather let somebody else drive. But I think it is applicable
to monetary policy. I hope we will keep our hands firmly on the wheel and be ready to tap the
brakes sooner than in the Greenbook scenario if we need to, as I think we may well have to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic growth has continued to display strength in the
Twelfth District in recent months. Payroll employment grew by almost 3 percent at an annual rate
this summer. The number of jobs expanded briskly in the construction, real estate, and local
government sectors in the District states that have fast-growing populations. Total manufacturing
payrolls were boosted by the pickup in Washington State where we see a lot of growth in aerospace
employment. This, of course, is the effect of Boeing's increased production as well as the effect of
that production on supplying industries. However, aside from the aerospace industry, growth in
District manufacturing employment has slowed a bit recently. Job gains have been most rapid in
Washington and Nevada where payrolls are expanding at about a 6 percent annual rate. For
example, the competition for skilled workers has stiffened in the Seattle area where Boeing,
Microsoft, and other high-tech employers are expanding rapidly. In the Las Vegas area,
construction of resort and other commercial projects continues to boom. The pace of expansion in
California has remained strong in recent months, but it no longer appears to be accelerating.
Payroll employment growth slowed to about a 2 percent average annual pace this summer, and that
is down from a 3 percent gain in the preceding 12 months.

9/30/97

The national economy has continued to yield good news, as we have all seen. Economic
activity appears to have turned in another strong performance in the third quarter and inflation has
fallen further. Looking forward, I think there are a number of reasons to expect aggregate demand
to slow in the quarters ahead. Inventories appear to be a bit on the high side as do stocks of most
other types of real assets held by businesses and households. At its present level, the dollar is a
restraining influence, and fiscal policy certainly remains somewhat restrictive. As a result, we
expect to see a slowdown in nominal GDP growth from 5-1/4 percent this year to about 4 percent in
1998, with real GDP expanding by about 2 percent next year. However, I think there is upside risk
to the outcome for next year, given that the economy has surprised us on the strong side over the
past year or so and the possibility that a significant positive supply shock is affecting the economy.
With regard to inflation, the roughly 2 percent increase in the GDP price index that I
expect for 1998 represents a relatively small rise over the 1-3/4 percent increase anticipated for this
year. Of course, conventional measures of resource utilization suggest upward pressure on
inflation. It is difficult, however, to know how much weight to put on these indicators. While there
are reasons to be concerned about their reliability at present, it is too soon to tell if their historical
relationships with inflation have broken down. Our analysis suggests that inflation forecasts in the
past two years based upon these relationships are within normal statistical bounds. Even if we do
get some upward pressure on inflation from high resource utilization, there are other factors in our
forecast for 1998 that tend to restrain inflation at least temporarily. These include negative speed
effects from the slowing growth of the economy and the high level of the dollar. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic conditions in the Seventh
District are quite similar to those on which I reported at our August meeting. Our regional

9/30/97
economy continues to expand at a moderate rate that is slower than the nation's, in part due to labor
supply constraints.
I met with our Advisory Councils on Agriculture, Labor, and Small Business a couple of
weeks ago. The primary focus of discussion in all three groups was labor market conditions.
Indeed, for small businesses, labor has become the limiting factor rather than capital, which seems
to be quite plentiful at least according to these people. The general sense was that labor markets
had tightened further since these advisory councils previously met last spring, and that is consistent
with the fact that our region's unemployment rate fell below 4 percent and stayed below 4 percent
during this period. These tighter conditions seem to be leading to some increases in the growth of
base pay. But with a few exceptions, the increases are quite modest and on the order of .2 to .3
percent higher than a year ago. More striking are the other measures that firms are taking to secure
qualified labor. These include signing bonuses for new employees and staying bonuses for existing
ones. These forms of compensation do not show up in the ECI, and they appear to be ever more
common. Small businesses are offering more flexible hours, customized benefits, and perks like
tickets to sporting events. At the same time, the trend toward greater use of variable pay seems to
have accelerated. Even some UAW assembly workers now have their pay tied to productivity
targets. Firms seem increasingly willing to move jobs to areas where labor is not as scarce. The
most extreme example mentioned at this meeting involved telemarketing firms, which seem to be
able to locate in areas with relatively high unemployment. A new facility in such an area can begin
its operations within a month. Tight labor markets also are encouraging, and in some cases forcing,
firms to spend more on worker training. Similarly, apprenticeship programs are being revitalized in
the building trades and elsewhere. Finally, council members reported that conditions remain
favorable for moving people from welfare to work. Even here, the constraint appears to be mainly

9/30/97

on the side of the labor supply. The individuals who have difficulty moving from welfare to the
workforce often cannot pass a drug test or are not familiar with the mores of the workplace.
As I reported before, District manufacturers and retailers continue to tell us that
competitive pressures inhibit their ability to raise prices, although there have been some exceptions.
For example, at our last meeting I reported on a large paper company that had pushed through its
first price increase since 1995. That increase has held for the entire industry, and the firm is
planning other price increases this fall. Prices of heavy and corrugated paper are up, and there is
talk that newsprint will soon be on allocation. Overall, manufacturing activity continues to increase
in the District, although at a slower pace than in the nation. Results from the Chicago Purchasing
Managers' Survey were released this morning, and the composite index moved lower, to 61.2 in
September from 64.3 in August, a sign that activity continues to increase at a healthy pace but more
slowly than in August. The prices-paid component was 59 and the supplier-deliveries component
came in at 58.1, both above 50 but below their August readings. At our August meeting, I
mentioned that there were some hints of slowing in the steel distribution and trucking industries,
which contacts thought might be temporary. That seems to have been the case as these contacts
now report that activity has returned to high levels.
In terms of consumer spending trends, reports generally point to continued strength in
August and September. Our survey showed that August was the best sales month so far this year
for most Michigan retailers. Across the District as well as nationally, discounters are now
experiencing strong sales performances, while the high-end or luxury segment is noticeably
sluggish. This represents a reversal from the pattern that we saw earlier this year. At one large
national retailer headquartered in the District, sales of appliances and home electronics have
increased considerably in recent weeks while sales of apparel have moderated. Auto and light truck

9/30/97
sales have been boosted by targeted incentives and the unbundling of option items. September
sales will not be quite as strong as the 15-1/2 million unit pace of July and August, but even with
the shortened reporting period, our automobile industry contacts believe September sales will be
higher than the level implied in the Greenbook.
Turning to the national outlook, I was slightly optimistic at our August meeting that the
fundamentals were in place for future real growth at trend rates, but the new paradigm dilemma is
now about as large as it gets. Second-quarter real GDP growth is substantially higher, while the
inflation data continue to roll in lower than expected. The burst of investment in potentially
productivity-enhancing capital equipment is encouraging. Nevertheless, although my inflation
outlook has moved lower since the August meeting, it still has a somewhat steeper upward tilt than
the Greenbook. On balance, I continue to view the risk to the outlook as being on the upside.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, may I interrupt for a moment? I would like to remind the
members that in this discussion of what happens if the Committee tightens sooner than is assumed
in the Greenbook forecast, the tighter alternative in the Greenbook is a first approximation. It is the
sort of scenario where the Committee starts the tightening process immediately, and by the middle
of next year the funds rate is at 7 percent instead of 6-1/2 percent. But as you can see if you look at
the numbers for 1999, we have slow growth in economic activity and the unemployment rate is
moving up very rapidly. So, this goes to the remark that I made earlier. If you looked out to 2000,
you would probably be thinking about moderating the amount of restraint that was being imposed
so that you did not needlessly overshoot the sustainable unemployment levels. I think you can get
some sense from the Greenbook as to what the difference might be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What worries me is that we may well need an actual turn
in the inflation rate to get a sense of what this process is all about because we are still guessing. If

9/30/97
we go back six months, even though we were then seeing falling inflation, the presumption that it
would continue to fall over the ensuing six months would probably have been considered almost
inconceivable. Until we get a sense that this unusual behavior is coming to an end, I don't think we
are going to understand fully what is happening.
MR. PRELL. I don't question that. I just felt that I probably overlooked a piece of
information that might have been a more direct answer to your question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. The Eleventh District economy continues to do very well, which I
regard as a good thing. The Dallas District was cited in the Beigebook summary as having
increased retail sales and some modest upward pressure on prices and wages in the services and
retail sectors. Manufacturing activity has picked up in our District since the last meeting. Oil
refineries are operating at record capacity levels. Rig counts are at their highest level since 1991,
and even so their number is being constrained by a shortage of crews. Existing home sales have
increased modestly, while commercial and office vacancy rates have continued to decline, leading
to rising commercial construction in our area and a shortage of construction workers. Moderate
gains in bank lending and continued competition between bank and nonbank lenders have been
putting some downward pressure on rates but mostly on terms. As for shortages and bottlenecks,
there have been some rail shipment disruptions related to railroad mergers, and anecdotal reports
from our Small Business Advisory Committee suggest that, at least in our part of the country, UPS
operations have not yet recovered fully from the strike. There is still a good bit of confusion there.
Most farm crops in our area are in better shape than they have been in quite a while, but our
farmers are almost obsessed with El Nino. They do not know what its impact is going to be on

9/30/97
them. An economist at Exxon, who is also a meteorologist, has asked us if we could get a
combination economic/weather forecast for them. Perhaps we will be looking into that!
Texas traditionally has faster employment growth than the nation as a whole but at the
same time a somewhat higher unemployment rate. That is the result of two factors, net strong inmigration of workers into Texas and the poverty and high levels of unemployment in the southern
tier of Texas counties along the Mexican border. That area is now benefiting from the recent strong
recovery of the Mexican economy, which is export-led and concentrated in northern Mexico
especially among the maquiladora plants on the Mexican side of the Tex-Mex border. That is
beginning to improve business noticeably in South Texas. I might just mention that the peso
devaluation gave a boost to the already strong and rapidly growing maquiladora industry. It is my
understanding that U.S. manufacturing employment has increased by only about 33,000 workers
since the end of 1994 while manufacturing employment in the maquiladoras has increased 300,000,
about ten times as much. Only seven U.S. states, if they are ranked in terms of manufacturing
employment, rank higher than the maquiladora industry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I did not quite get the difference between the 33,000 and
300,000. What is the 33,000 again?
MR. MCTEER. The 33,000 is the increase in U.S. manufacturing employment since the
end of 1994.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In Texas?
MR. MCTEER. No, I think it is for the nation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.
MR. MCTEER. And the 300,000 is the increase in maquiladora manufacturing
employment over the same period. If we rank the states in terms of manufacturing employment,

9/30/97

California is first, Ohio is next, then Texas, Illinois, Michigan, Pennsylvania and New York. The
maquiladoras would rank eighth, coming in ahead of North Carolina and Florida, for example,
which I find to be something of a surprise. They are supplementing the U.S. manufacturing
capacity, and I think a lot of that supplemented capacity is in the industrial Midwest. The point
there is that the maquiladora manufacturing capacity is helping to alleviate the pressure on U.S.
capacity utilization.
I might also mention with respect to Mexico that since the last FOMC meeting. Harvey
Rosenblum and I spent a day with the Board of Governors of the Bank of Mexico and we also met
with the Minister of Finance. Some of my impressions are as follows: The smoothness of the
Mexican election should not encourage us too much. There is a mood of "get even" and "pay
back" that threatens to take economic policymaking out of the control of the technocrats in Mexico.
The parties of the left and the right seem more willing to get together to oppose the center than to
get with the center to oppose the other extreme. So far, the economic argument is focused on
whether and how much to roll back the value-added tax that was increased during the peso crisis.
While the macro numbers describing the Mexican economic recovery are strong--their real GDP
increased almost 9 percent over the past year--it is concentrated in the export sector, which is also
concentrated geographically in the northern part of Mexico. This recovery is missing a lot of the
people who were harmed by the initial downturn and by the devaluation. The point is that the vast
majority of the people have not felt much of the benefit of the rebound, and this is limiting the
political credit that might have been given for the good macroeconomic performance. While the
Mexicans have stopped the hemorrhaging of their banking system, the latter's return to health has
barely begun and it remains vulnerable. In addition, the cost of the government's rescue efforts is a
double-digit percentage of GDP, another factor contributing to the lowering of standards of living.

9/30/97
The Mexican authorities understand the dilemmas and the dangers of having their exchange rate
held up in real terms by capital inflows, but their desire to maintain an open economy leaves them
with not much they can do about it, and they may be a little nervous about being in somewhat the
same position now as they were in 1994. From our side of the border, their strong peso is boosting
our exports. A favorite way of measuring exports to Mexico is to measure the length of the line of
trucks in Laredo going toward Monterey on 1-35, and it is typically backed up 5 to 7 miles these
days.
Turning to the U.S. economy, what can I say except "the beat goes on." It is good to see
the near-term Greenbook forecast taking on more of an optimistic, new paradigm tone. I did note
that the Greenbook soul searching over the new era rhetoric was, in Mike Prell's words, "tortuous,"
but it was appreciated nevertheless. As for Greenbook details, the only thing I would quibble with
a little is that we see the real third-quarter growth rate to be considerably stronger than the
Greenbook has it now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. Mr. Chairman, the New England economy continues to grow steadily
at roughly the national rate. The regional unemployment rate in August was about 4.3 percent, and
initial unemployment claims continue to trend down. Labor force participation rates are rising in
response to the attractive employment situation. Most of our job growth has been concentrated in
services, as is true for the national economy, but no sector of the regional economy is doing poorly
at present. Even manufacturing employment has begun to edge up. This represents a rather
striking contrast. We are always looking at how things got out of whack in New England at the end
of the 1980s and how things are different now, and hopefully they are. At the end of the 1980s,
New England was enjoying a very high degree of prosperity. Then, as now, most of the new jobs

9/30/97
were in services, but that situation masked employment declines in many of the region's
manufacturing industries, and that, of course, played into the depth of the recession when the
bubble finally burst in New England.
Our informal conversations with the region's retailers and manufacturers confirm the
positive picture. Retail sales and manufacturing revenues are up from year-ago levels, surpassing
expectations in many cases. Manufacturing strength is quite broad-based, with aircraft parts and
furniture exhibiting some of the most rapid growth. Most retail and manufacturing contacts report
that they have capital expansions under way. Some of the manufacturing plans are quite ambitious.
Many of our contacts characterized labor markets as tight. Several commented that the quality of
the pool of people from which they draw has declined. Employers claim to be resisting increasing
wages across the board, although the normal wage increase seems to be edging up from what it was
a few months ago. It is now in the 3 to 5 percent range. In addition, special bonuses and other
incentives seem to be available to more and more of the workforce. While overall wage levels
continue to rise only in the moderate range I have talked about, our contacts in the temporary help
business commonly report increases of 10 percent or more, and in some cases a lot more. Wage
increases are particularly rapid for people with technical skills. These workers in New England, as
well as elsewhere, are in very short supply. Many receive offers of permanent employment but are
choosing to stay in contract work. The temporary help agencies report no difficulty in passing the
increased cost of temporary workers on to their customers. Salary pressures are also quite intense,
as you can imagine, in the asset management area. One respondent observed that while the general
salary pool increase at his firm is 4 percent, investment managers have bonuses like sports stars.
Bonuses to existing employees who refer new hires are becoming more prevalent along with
signing bonuses, and these referral bonuses typically range somewhere between $500 and $2000.

9/30/97

Most companies in retailing and manufacturing continue, however, to hold the line on
prices, citing competitive pressures. Even when prices of materials or wages have increased, gains
in efficiency have enabled companies to maintain selling prices without sacrificing margins. A
contact from a very large company regarded as one of the nation's most efficient observed that she
sees virtually unlimited opportunities for cutting costs and improving productivity. These
opportunities often involve changes in procedures rather than specific new capital investments.
I must say that I was impressed by some of the discussion when a trade mission from
India recently visited Boston; the trade mission included India's minister of trade and industry and
the ambassador. They were talking a bit about the boom in some areas of the Indian economy. In
particular, they talked about how several hospitals in the Boston area now create automated records
during the day, which are shipped overnight via telecommunications to Bombay, entered into
online real time databases there, and then are available the next morning for use by our hospitals,
effectively a day or less from the time that they were created. This basically moves major back
office operations out of Boston to Bombay in a way that seems to be fairly easy to set up. They
were pointing to the advantages that India has, and it was quite striking that this improved service
was available to hospitals and other kinds of companies that traditionally have had some difficulty
with the productivity of their back office operations. Another contact attributed low inflation to
Wal-Mart and other retail giants who have taught companies to be just as difficult with their
suppliers as their customers are with them.
Real estate markets throughout New England continue to be quite active, and we had
some improvement in previously lagging areas, Rhode Island for one. Prices, however, are
increasing as yet only modestly.

9/30/97
I was intrigued by Mike Prell's discussion of the Greenbook forecast because I think it
addressed a lot of the differences that we had with the Greenbook presentation. We agree with
your assessment of the outlook for growth, Mike, particularly over the short run--that is, over the
next 3 quarters or so. We have some concerns after that. We think it likely that unemployment
will decline to the 4-1/2 percent level talked about in the Greenbook and that, at least in the short
term, inflation will creep up only modestly. However, we begin to have some questions after the
short term. We question whether the appreciated dollar will stay where it is over the entire
projection period and have the impact on controlling inflation that is expected in the Greenbook
forecast. We wonder whether we are going to have more normal cost increases in benefits. You
talked a little about that, Mike. It is not featured much in the Greenbook, but you did bring it into
your discussion. We think it possible that more normal wage increases will begin to reassert
themselves sooner rather than later. I also question whether the impact from the decline in the
stock market that we have been expecting for so long will really begin to hit us in the early part of
1998 the way both your standard forecast and your alternative forecast assume.
It seems that aside from the dollar, you are hanging your hat on two things to derive a
very rosy forecast. They are a 100 basis point increase in the federal funds rate and a related drop
in the stock market. I want to question whether, if we get on this bandwagon a little earlier than is
assumed in the Greenbook, we can do a little less and have a little more of an impact on asset
valuations going forward. That would help to moderate demand pressures and reduce the risk that I
think is apparent in this Greenbook forecast that the economy could get out of control earlier next
year than we expect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.

9/30/97

MR. JORDAN. Thank you. In addition to our usual advisory council meetings and
other contacts, we had a board of directors meeting earlier this month with all the directors from
our three offices and, in conjunction with that, a breakfast with some leading manufacturing CEOs
to talk about innovations, greater efficiencies, and new products. Chairman Greenspan was present
to hear these executives as well as the directors. So, if the way I feed back what was said does not
fit with your impressions and recollections, Mr. Chairman, you may want to add to or correct what
I have to say here.
We were trying to get a sense of what was happening within companies and whether or
not that resonates well with what we see in various economic statistics. Some of the common
themes and responses were as follows. The increase in manufacturing capacity and in efficiency
and/or productivity as seen by firms reflects in part the very strong incentives that they all feel as
well as the availability of new technologies that can be used to minimize their downtimes, tighten
their control of factor input costs, and improve the management of their inventories. They said that
the incentives for much of that increase in capacity and related productivity would have been there
and could have been accommodated even without major expenditures for capacity. They talked a
lot about the continued shortening in product life cycles, and observed that the only way they could
hold prevailing product prices steady was through product enhancements. They doubted whether
such enhancements were accurately reflected as different products within their own firms, let alone
in the statistics. The CAD/CAM technologies are making it possible for them to shorten product
life cycles dramatically, which then allows them to customize the products far more readily than
they were able to before. Also, they offer more frequent shipments to their customers as a way to
reduce the inventory costs of the customers. That sometimes allows them to raise the posted price,
but for the most part it simply reduces the pressure they feel to cut their prices. That is a product

9/30/97
enhancement even though it would never be recorded as a different product when it is simply made
available more frequently. Production automation means that the setup times are dropping sharply,
and in turn that means that business firms have more actual capacity even with the same physical
plant facilities and product enhancements are facilitated.
Global competition and outsourcing together with the constraints on pricing are
increasing the incentives for innovating and introducing new products at a faster pace. I got the
sense that we were nowhere close to the end of that set of opportunities. One newspaper executive
talked about how their overhead relative to total revenue has been falling because the same support
expenditures are now spread over much, much larger volumes. This is made possible by new
technologies that have caused a very sharp drop in production and distribution costs. Steel is one
industry that was well represented, and they commented that over the last 10 years their industry
has had a major increase in labor productivity averaging 4.4 percent per year. Over that same 10
years, they have experienced a 57 percent increase in labor costs per hour with no increase in
product costs per ton.
A little more on labor: An interesting twist on what we have been hearing or thinking
about the behavior of unions is that they are now providing more and more intensive training of
union workers to insure that the productivity of their members versus nonunion workers is
sufficient to more than offset any wage differences. Within the last 10 years, construction and
some other unions have adopted what they now call a "lifetime-of-learning" philosophy as a part of
the rationale for union membership. The objective is, of course, to have their members stay in
demand as the most highly-skilled and therefore the most highly-paid workers. This is a shift away
from earlier philosophies of protecting jobs through various restrictive labor market practices.
There was also a claim that for office workers we are only beginning to see the kinds of

9/30/97
technologies that will allow workers to be trained and retrained on a continuing basis at their desks
or their work stations. How that might enhance productivity also was discussed.
One note about the tightness of labor markets: It was said that Wendy's Restaurants
across the nation once had a notice in the center of every table that said "special of the day." Now
every table has a list of "positions available."
Other directors commented that retail sales went flat last spring. They characterized
retail markets by saying that "customers went into a cave." Then, in the course of July and August,
customers crawled out of their caves and started to spend at a surprisingly strong rate in the view of
some directors. Major retailers reportedly are growing more confident, and the expectation now is
that we will see orders increasing in the period ahead.
With respect to the real estate market, we hear that higher-priced homes are still staying
on the market a relatively long time and that in some metro areas overbuilding is becoming more
obvious in what had been hot markets. Our directors expect that situation to get even worse. Some
of the bank directors reported brisk home refinancing in the most recent weeks. The bankers also
talked about increasingly skimpy pricing in their C&I lending. They claimed that banks have
plenty of money to lend and that everyone is driving their volume up to maintain earnings in the
face of slimmer margins. One banker commented that everybody is chasing deals.
Turning to the national economy, a year ago we were looking at a near-term forecast for
the fourth quarter of 1996 and the first quarter of this year that looked satisfactory, with nominal
spending growth in the 4-1/2 to 5 percent range. Of course, that did not happen. We were very
surprised at how much stronger than expected nominal and real growth were in that period. That
was a pleasant development because, at least in that period, the rapid growth was not yet associated
with an acceleration of inflation. With the advantage of hindsight, we can see that that condition

9/30/97

was being signaled by an acceleration of money growth. We got a lot more growth in broad money
but also in the base, sweep-adjusted Ml, and MZM than was projected at the time of the September
meeting. Nominal spending growth needed to slow down, and it did slow down in the spring
quarter. Money growth also slowed down, providing a little respite. But money growth then
started to accelerate again, and we are now getting upward revisions in the third-quarter GDP
numbers, both real and nominal. I was out in San Francisco a couple of weeks ago and Larry
Klein, who was on Bob Parry's program, reported that he uses a high-frequency model to make a
new estimate of the economy every Monday. He has been revising his forecast successively
upward, and at that point he already had growth of 4 percent in real and 6 percent in nominal GDP
for this quarter. He said that each time he makes this estimate, the economy looks a little stronger.
That concerns me because we again are looking at a rather good forecast in the
Greenbook. If this forecast turns out to be correct with or without the policy adjustments it implies,
I would be comfortable. But I am more and more concerned that we are likely to be surprised again
in the near term by just how much stronger nominal spending is than we are anticipating. So, when
the money numbers accelerate as dramatically as they have over the last couple of months, I see a
need for those increases to slow and I am not comfortable that our policy is right. I cannot
visualize the conditions that would allow me to accept growth of the sweep-adjusted monetary base
on the order of 7 percent--and that growth is currently accelerating--at this stage of the cycle. It
says to me that we more likely have calibrated the nominal funds rates too low rather than too high.
The way we usually look at real interest rates--the real funds rate or some other real
short-term interest rate--abstracts from the idea that real interest rates have to be thought of in a
relative context. If people in their decision-making are adjusting upward their expectations about
real returns on productive assets in real estate markets, equity markets, or elsewhere, then real

9/30/97
short-term money market interest rates have moved down in a relative sense even if consumer price
inflation has moved down. There were references earlier to the possibility that boom conditions
could emerge. If boom conditions are starting to emerge in the minds of people, then the stance or
thrust of policy has become progressively more expansionary even with an unchanged nominal
funds rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Tenth District economy continues
strong. Our manufacturing sector is still operating at very high levels of capacity. District retailers
are again experiencing good sales after a slowdown this summer. The energy sector is strong. The
District farm economy is in uniformly good condition; that includes both our grain and cattle
industries. The construction sector has shown some slowing over the last several months but from
elevated levels to more moderate levels of activity. We have seen some slowing in our labor
markets, but that may be due largely to the fact that we had very low unemployment to begin with,
anywhere from 2 percent to 4 percent across the District. In the circumstances, our labor markets
remain quite tight and we are continuing to see some evidence of wage pressures across the board.
That includes entry-level workers, technicians, engineers, and so forth. Wages for entry-level jobs
are now reported as starting at about $10 per hour in the Denver area, and entry-level wages are
rising elsewhere in the District. Mike Prell and others have mentioned that medical costs are
expected to increase, and we too are seeing evidence of that. In fact,
executive with

who is an

said that they expect premium increases of 4 to 6 percent or

higher and that half of the health plans in Colorado are now losing money. So, they are going to
push to recover their rising costs.

9/30/97
On the inflation front we have not seen widespread increases in prices, but there are
indications of higher prices in some sectors such as the transportation industry. Some of our major
railroads have pushed through price increases. Their customers have complained, but since the
trucking industry is doing the same thing, competition is not forcing the railroads to back off.
On the national level, I would be skeptical about pushing the concept that we are
experiencing a new paradigm. I do think, though, that business cycles do not repeat themselves
exactly as we have seen in the past. A host of special factors seem to be affecting various parts of
the economy, but fundamental economic forces may well come back to bear on the course of this
cycle. I am alerted to that possibility when I look at the level of resource utilization throughout the
economy, and that makes me skeptical of the explanation that we have a new paradigm that will
last. I do not mean to ignore some other developments, which I will keep in mind when Don Kohn
presents his alternatives to us a little later. These include a real fed funds rate that remains high in
an historical context, core CPI inflation that has been trending lower, pipeline inflation that is
essentially absent right now, inflation expectations that continue to be stable for now, inflation
indicators that are pointing downward, a dollar that is higher at this point, and long-term rates that
are lower than they were somewhat earlier. That is the other side of the coin that everyone is
talking about and debating, and we have to keep it in mind as we raise concerns about the level of
resource utilization and its implications for inflation. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. The economy in the Philadelphia District currently is performing much
as it has in recent months. It features steady growth at a moderate pace, tight labor markets, and
little or no upward pressure on prices. In commercial real estate, vacancy rates are low and rents
are rising. More capacity is in train, however, and rents are expected to be under less pressure as

9/30/97
more space is completed. As yet, there is surprisingly little speculative building going on in the
Third District. Although wage increases seem to be holding at around 4 percent, there are more
reports of additional perks, signing bonuses, and other incentives to attract and retain skilled
people. With business activity generally favorable, attitudes are positive but tough competition
seems to be providing a restraining influence on the development of a boom mentality.
Turning to the nation, we are in a reasonably comfortable position for now. Actual
performance at the macro level continues to be surprisingly good, and the risks to that favorable
performance are largely unchanged from recent months. Like some of the rest of us, I did
appreciate the confessions of a tortured staff. Perhaps the time has come for all of us to torture
ourselves less. Most people like to be right rather than wrong; most would rather have the outcome
turn out to be better than worse. The problem here is that things have turned out to be better, but
most of us have been wrong. [Laughter] Depending on one's mindset, each of us will respond
either by saying, "The old model is still true; just give it time; it will reassert itself," or by saying,
"There is a new model at work and the world is indeed different." My guess is that the truth is
probably somewhere in the middle. We just do not know where in the middle at this point. But I
think the time has come for us to be less defensive, and the way we do that is to adopt the stance of
being open minded and alert and let the truth, whatever it is, fall out wherever it might. In the
meantime, we make the best judgments we can. If we are right, we are right; and if we are wrong,
we are wrong. But I do not think we ought to torture ourselves any longer.
MR. PRELL. I should say that the word I used to describe the Greenbook forecast was
"tortuous." [Laughter] I hope we did not torture the readers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.

9/30/97

MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I have little new to report on the Eighth District
economy. On balance, economic performance has improved in the third quarter, as we hear has
occurred in other districts. Sales exceeded the expectations of many businesses. District labor
markets are stretched to the limit in many areas, and that is putting a damper on payroll
employment growth. For example, the latest Manpower survey as well as a recent survey of small
businesses in the District show continued strength in labor demand relative to the supply of
qualified workers, resulting in some pressure on wages. The market for high-priced homes has
weakened somewhat in the District, but overall residential building has been held back more by
supply than by demand factors. District banking data are broadly consistent with an overall
strengthening in activity recently, as reflected in the apparent year-over-year growth in bank loans
at a double-digit pace in the second quarter. One problem with this assessment, however, is that the
data exclude what was the District's largest banking institution, now part of another District for
statistical purposes.
The outlook for the nation continues to improve. The substantial upward shift in the
Greenbook's outlook for economic activity in 1997 is consistent with our view from the Eighth
District. Perhaps the most important reason for this good outlook is that inflation and inflation
expectations have declined, facilitating sounder economic decisions and avoiding imbalances that
occurred in past expansions. When the recession started in the third quarter of 1990, inflation as
measured by the CPI had accelerated to 7 percent. By the first quarter of 1991, the CPI inflation
rate had dropped to 3 percent, and it stayed near that level until recently. This year the inflation
rate has dropped to an annual rate of 1.6 percent through August. We should view this
unanticipated development as an opportunity to take a step closer to price stability, a step that
would put our inflation performance much more in line with that of other industrial countries.

9/30/97
Longer-term inflation expectations appear to have come down a bit in financial markets
as well, perhaps reflecting the view that we will lock in a rate of inflation lower than 3 percent.
However, we have not taken any important steps to do so as yet. If anything, and Jerry Jordan
mentioned this in a very clear fashion, monetary policy may be getting more accommodative as
gauged by the growth of money and credit. The broad aggregates, M2 and M3, surged in the last
12 weeks and remain above the upper bounds of their target ranges for 1997. We see a similar
surge in the narrow monetary aggregates after adjusting for sweep accounts. These indicators of an
expansionary monetary policy stance are consistent with the continued rapid growth in bank credit
we have observed and a readily available supply of loans for both consumers and businesses.
The Greenbook is forecasting a substantial acceleration of inflation and a significant
increase in the federal funds rate target in 1998. If such actions are judged by the Committee as
likely to be needed in 1998, then why not adopt a tighter monetary policy stance in 1997? Policy
actions while the economy is robust, as it is now, might be less disruptive than they would be in a
situation where real growth is slowing and inflation is accelerating, as is forecast for next year. A
little preventive medicine sooner, which is not a new theme in light of some of the comments made
here today, might avoid such a dilemma later. I realize that markets would be surprised by such an
action because we have not laid the groundwork for it. We have not been explicit about our
inflation objective. If we had been, markets would not be caught completely off guard by monetary
policy actions to preserve the inflation gains we have experienced this year. For all intents and
purposes, those gains have brought us to price stability. Indeed, markets might react favorably to
such actions since low and stable inflation is sound economic policy. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stem.

9/30/97
MR. STERN. Thank you. The Ninth District economy remains quite healthy, and I have
asked myself what has changed in our area that might provide a clue as to the future performance of
the national economy. The short answer to that is "not much," but let me comment on a few
aspects of the situation in any event. District agricultural conditions are mixed. Livestock
producers find themselves in better shape than they expected and are having their best year in some
time. On the other hand, producers of wheat and other small grains are finding themselves in even
worse shape than they anticipated, both in terms of the size of their crops and the prices they are
going to get. As Mike Moskow commented, the paper industry is doing better and probably better
than it expected at this point in time. The scramble for labor continues in the District and, if
anything, it has intensified. I would say that there is more commentary among business people
about wage pressures than I was hearing a few months ago. For the most part, that has not
translated into price pressures or price increases yet. I have come across a couple of reports of
firms that, after not raising prices or at least not making price increases stick in recent years, have
done so recently, and it appears that those increases will stick. So, there may be something going
on there, but I would say it is premature to conclude very much.
As far as the national economy is concerned, given the momentum that appears to be
underlying what is going on, I have some sympathy for the changes to the Greenbook forecast. We
are looking at more real growth and lower inflation, and that is sensible. But it does strike me that
changes to the forecast could almost as easily have been made in the opposite direction on the
grounds that the unemployment rate has fallen more rapidly than we anticipated, capacity
utilization rates have risen, employment gains have been larger than can be sustained in the long
run, and all of that might lead us to believe that we are going to see more inflation and less growth
in the future, even in the relatively near future, than is envisioned in the Greenbook.

9/30/97
However that may be, my concerns are heightened a bit by some analysis we have done
on what I would describe as proxies for imbalances. Of course, these variables are not infallible,
but they all have moved into ranges where they are beginning to flash some warning signs. In
particular, we have been looking at the quit rate, capacity utilization in manufacturing, and the term
structure spread. Based on historical performance, all these indicators are now in ranges where we
might anticipate slower real growth and/or more inflation than in the Greenbook forecast some time
in the next 12 months. Again, I would not want to make too much of that at this point, but for those
of us who still have some faith in the old time religion, I do think that there may be some warning
signs out there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our Sixth District economy looks much the
way it did six weeks ago, and District activity finished the summer at a pace that looks much the
same as that for the nation. The regionally important tourism and hospitality industries could not
be stronger, and this is despite the added capacity that I reported at previous meetings. At the same
time, we have seen some impact on tourism from a stronger dollar. Traffic from Europe, especially
Germany, is down, but that has been offset by a pickup in visitors from other areas of the world
such as Latin America. Manufacturing seems to have slowed somewhat after a strong summer.
Activity remains solid in shipbuilding and energy. Further expansion from present levels in the oil
and gas drilling business is limited by the availability of rigs, many of which are being refurbished
after having been written off earlier as unusable. Our people tell us that inventories remain in good
balance for the most part. There is growing anecdotal evidence suggesting that continued strength
in investment spending is motivated more by the desire to cut costs and improve productivity than
the desire to increase capacity in anticipation of future growth. In Alabama, where many small

9/30/97
towns dependent on apparel manufacturing have been hard hit in recent years as I have said at a
couple of meetings, we have seen a welcome influx of light manufacturing, especially electronics
and high-tech. Much of that seems to be driven by the new southern auto industry in that part of
the country. Residential construction in our area appears to be moving sideways rather than falling
off to some extent as we expected would occur by now. Retail and industrial construction has
passed its peak, but office construction is still showing some acceleration in the Southeast. Retail
sales were good in July but slowed again in August.
No one is surprised that labor markets in our region remain tight, although I would not
characterize them as tighter than a year ago. Perhaps that is because our growth was relatively
stronger early in this expansion. An interesting story that matches some others comes from one of
our businessmen in a very small meter-reading business. He said that he was having a very
difficult time recruiting young people with good driving records to run around the community and
read meters. His solution was to hire two people in the place of one: a retiree with a legitimate
driver's license and a good driving record who needed something to do and a young person with
good legs to do the running between the houses. He said the experiment has worked quite well.
This is an interesting way to get around the labor shortage in that area. Despite tight labor markets,
we still are not hearing any reports of significant wage increases. Retailers continue to tell us that
they expect to get no meaningful price increases over the next six months. And while
manufacturers say that their margins continue to narrow at least a little, even small increases in
prices are tough to pass on, a now-familiar story.
At the national level, we see the picture much the same as most of those who have
commented this morning: higher-than-anticipated growth and lower-than-anticipated inflation.
Like the Greenbook, we too expect economic growth to slow in the latter part of the year and into

9/30/97
1998, partly due to inventories but also reflecting moderation in the growth of investment spending
and in the contribution from exports. We are not anticipating any significant new price pressures in
the near term, but we do expect an upward drift next year to the extent that energy prices increase
and we lose the moderating effect they have exerted this year.
I am not looking at Ed Boehne's notes, but I too believe that we continue to be in a
period where we should allow ourselves to enjoy the happy combination of developments that have
occurred, even if we do not fully understand them. My instincts, like almost everybody else's,
indicate that the risks are still somewhat on the upside and that we are still likely to need to tighten
at some later point down the road. If I were more confident that the economy would play out as
laid out in the Greenbook, I would be beating the table for an early policy move. I believe that
what probably has been at work is not just the good fortune of positive shocks but rather the more
subtle and hopefully more lasting effect of some years of good monetary policy and, in more recent
years, of better fiscal policy and expectations of more of the same. I think there is at least a
reasonable chance we could continue to be happily surprised for a while longer. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The rate of economic
growth in the Second District has held fairly steady since the last meeting. The latest figures on
payroll employment suggest a third-quarter acceleration in the pace of job creation, though the
figures were held down a bit by the UPS strike. The job growth in New York and New Jersey
averaged an annual rate of 0.9 percent over the last three months, but if we remove the strike effect,
the rate of growth actually would be about 1.7 percent despite some drag from the public sector.
Consumer spending in our area is reasonably good. The retailers are happy and report that sales are

9/30/97
a little ahead of their plans. In the real estate area, the main characteristic continues to be weakness
in upstate New York and some further tightening of the space markets in various parts of
Manhattan. Manufacturing in the area continues to be fairly good, again with some drag from the
upstate New York area. That was dramatized recently by Eastman Kodak's announcement that it
will cut at least 10,000 jobs; they did not specify where the cuts would occur, but a third of their
workforce is in upstate New York. Within the District, consumer price inflation averaged 2.2
percent during the 12 months ended in August, about matching the national rate.
On the national level, we do not have quite the drama in our forecast of a 20 percent
correction in the stock market or a 100 basis point tightening, but our forecast is a reasonably
attractive one in any event. We look for GDP growth of 3-1/4 to 3-1/2 percent in the third quarter,
but we then have growth slowing to about the trend rate both at the end of 1997 and into 1998. The
big variable, of course, is the consumer. We anticipate that consumer spending will settle down to
a trend growth rate of about 2-1/2 percent, and for reasons related to the question I asked earlier, we
think that inventory investment will be a significant drag on GDP growth as will net exports. We
have been happily surprised, as has everybody else, by the performance of inflation and actually
have reduced our trend inflation rate somewhat for the balance of 1997. But we have inflation
picking up gradually in 1998 and 1999, hitting about 3.2 percent in 1999. That is measured as it
would be today, though the reported numbers will presumably be lower as various technical
improvements are worked in. We think the real threat to the inflation forecast would be a stronger
economy induced by higher-than-projected increases in consumer spending. We do not particularly
expect that to happen, but it does make us believe that the risk to the forecast is that the economy
will be stronger than we anticipate, and therefore the inflation risk will be somewhat greater.

9/30/97
Since some members are wandering into the policy area, I will refer to our view which is
that we do not need to tighten quite yet. However, we think the time is coming somewhat closer
than we thought it was a meeting or two ago. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. Like Ed Boehne and a few others, I feel moved to say a few things about
new and old paradigms. If one listens to the economic and financial press and sometimes to the
conversation around this table, one gets the impression that there are only two possible
explanations for what is happening at the moment. One is that the economy's functioning has not
really changed much over the last 20 to 30 years. In this view, economists' models with the
parameters fitted to the data of the last couple of decades are still good predictors; it is just that
something temporary or several temporary factors are giving us more favorable results right now.
When these temporary factors turn around, everything will snap back into place. In particular,
inflation and low productivity growth, the bugaboos of the U.S. economy since the late 1960s or
early 1970s, will be plaguing us as much as ever.
The alternative explanation is that there is a new era or new paradigm, which actually
seems to mean no paradigm. In this view, it is possible "to have the cake and eat it too" without
worrying about productivity or inflation because the former will be rapid and the latter nonexistent.
In this view, economists are to be ignored if they say anything cautionary about overheating or
bubbles in asset values or wages outrunning productivity growth. The atmosphere has gotten a
little like the policy discussions of the early 1980s, which I remember very clearly. In that period,
the so-called supply side economists overwhelmed the essential kernel of truth in their thesis that
incentives, including tax incentives, matter to economic performance. They made absurd claims
about the magnitude of the likely effects on labor supply or the saving rate of small, marginal

9/30/97

changes in tax rates. Those who warned that high deficits generated by cutting tax rates without
cutting spending might lead to either inflation or, with a responsible Federal Reserve, to higher
interest rates and a punishingly high dollar were labeled as old paradigm Keynesians who were not
to be paid much mind. It was not a helpful debate, and it led to bad policy and an undermining of
confidence in the economics profession. Both are things that ought to be avoided. [Laughter]
At the moment, it seems to me that we ought to be focusing not on new or old paradigms
but on the fact, and it is a fact, that while economists have learned a great deal about how the
economy works over the last two or three decades, it is demonstrably functioning better than any of
us thought it would. Now, good fiscal policy and good monetary policy clearly get some of the
credit for this, but there is accumulating evidence that the economy is more flexible and responsive
and less inflation-prone than it used to be. To my mind, one of the most gratifying charts in the
Greenbook, meeting after meeting, is the inventory-sales ratio chart, especially in manufacturing,
which keeps trending down and suggests that manufacturers really have learned something about
inventory management.
More fundamentally, the surprising thing about the economy at the moment is the
uniformity in the activity levels across the country and across sectors of the economy. Labor
markets seem to be almost uniformly tight. Twelve people around this table said almost exactly the
same thing--not quite, but very close. We do not really understand why this is true, but one has to
suspect that there is more flexibility both in labor markets and in production location than there
used to be. Workers move to jobs and jobs move to workers; capital moves more easily nationally
and internationally; and production can be located and expanded in different places, including
overseas and across the Mexican border, more readily than it used to be. We have heard some

9/30/97
wonderful examples of this today--Cathy Minehan's Bombay back office for Boston area hospitals,
as well as the maquiladora process.
The other surprising development is the apparent increase in productivity growth at a
time when the economy has been growing for a long period and the boom might be expected to be
running out of steam. Economists have always given two reasons for the observed slowdown in
productivity at the peak of the cycle. The first one never seemed to me to make very much sense,
but we all used to say to each other that we were scraping the bottom of the labor market and
bringing in less skilled, less experienced people. That was undoubtedly true, but a drop from 5-1/2
percent to 4-1/2 percent in the unemployment rate, while a big drop in unemployment, means an
increase of only a little more than 1 percent in the employed labor force. And it is hard to believe
that this 1 percent of the workforce, however inept and inexperienced, could really drag down
productivity all that much.
The other explanation that one still hears is that old, less efficient capacity is brought on
line. When the old boiler that does not have to be used until the firm is facing severe capacity
constraints is finally brought on line, it obviously is less productive. That also seems to make less
and less sense after a period of very high investment accompanied by rapid technological change.
It may be that the tight labor markets in the current environment actually provide incentives for
increasing productivity.
None of this seems to be a reason for arguing that economists do not know anything or
that staff is irrelevant. It does seem to provide a rationale for at least a tentative hypothesis that the
U.S. economy is less inflation-prone today than it was in the 1970s and 1980s for a lot of reasons
relating to globalization, information technology, pro-competitive developments, and the safety
valve that recent immigration might have given us in the labor market. Econometrics is a very

9/30/97
useful thing, but it is inherently conservative in the sense that when parameters shift, the equations
pick this up with a very considerable lag. At the moment, it is very hard to defend the proposition
that economists "know" in some sense that an economy operating below 5-1/2 percent
unemployment is taking on a serious risk of wage and price increases. We have been operating in
that range now for quite a while, and we have not seen either rapid acceleration in wages or any
increase in prices. We still have declining core inflation.
The temporary factor most frequently invoked to explain this is the high dollar, but that
is not a fully plausible explanation even in an economy that is much more open than it used to be.
This is not a plea for new era thinking in the sense of throwing caution to the wind. It is a plea for
economists to stop being defensive and to try to figure out more carefully, as the staff here is
actually doing, how this dynamic economy is really working.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.
MR. MEYER. My view of the economic outlook has changed rather significantly since
the last meeting. At that time, it appeared that growth had slowed more sharply in the second
quarter than now appears to have been the case and that growth might remain near its sustainable
trend in the second half and into 1998. To be sure, the risk of higher inflation remained, but the
slowdown in growth and the recent favorable inflation performance removed any sense of urgency
to the policy decision.
The crosscurrents that underpinned the earlier forecast, specifically between the
projected slowing in inventory investment and the expected rebound in demand, seem well enough
in evidence now and continue to underpin the forecast of slower growth in the second half of this
year. But crosscurrents do not necessarily balance, and the crosscurrents in question apparently
have not yielded a return to trend growth. Indeed, growth in the third quarter appears likely to be

9/30/97

about as strong as it was in the second quarter. Perhaps more importantly, the ample evidence of
positive fundamentals including, I believe, supportive financial conditions and the absence of signs
of imbalances suggest that growth is likely to remain above trend for some time in the absence of a
change in policy. As a result, it now appears likely that the unemployment rate will decline to a
new cyclical low in coming quarters.
Three important changes in the Greenbook forecast for this meeting effectively highlight
the key issues in the forecast. First, the staff forecast for growth in the first half of 1998 was
revised upward to about a 3 percent rate, with the unemployment rate falling to 4-1/2 percent by
mid-1998. Second, a series of adjustments and forecast assumptions were introduced that
moderated the decline in the unemployment rate and the rise in inflation associated with a higher
growth forecast. And third, the normal practice of a constant funds rate, either nominal or more
recently real, was replaced by a preemptive policy response. The key is the interaction among
these changes. Even with the more favorable assumptions about the link from growth to inflation
pressures, the higher growth path of the Greenbook forecast yields an unfavorable inflation
outcome, justifying a preemptive policy response.
I believe that the risks relative to the staff growth forecast are now more evenly
balanced, and I would endorse a preemptive policy response to the projected decline in the
unemployment rate and increased risk of inflation. I do have some reservations, however, about
three changes in assumptions in this forecast, each of which worked to diminish the response of
inflation to the upward revised path of growth. The staff revised upward its projections of both
labor force and productivity growth, in effect raising the trend rate of GDP growth over the forecast
period and as a result moderating the decline in the unemployment rate. In addition, the staff
revised downward the response of wages and prices to the lower unemployment rate. Mike Prell

9/30/97

referred to these changes as a flirtation with new era thinking. They are clearly an effort to balance
what I have called regularities and possibilities. Whatever the merits of these adjustments, they
leave in my judgment considerably greater upside risk to the Greenbook forecast of inflation than
has been the case in earlier forecasts.
I can appreciate the conditions that motivated such adjustments. I too would like to get
the inflation forecast right for a change, and I too want to be careful to balance regularities and
possibilities in my forecast. I can hardly argue that the adjustments that were made are implausible
or that the productivity path in the forecast is unbelievable. But this does change the balance of
risks, in my view, in relation to the Greenbook forecast.
While the policy change is introduced in an understated way in the Greenbook, it is also
an important change in the forecast assumptions. It is notable not only because it is preemptive, but
also because the increase in rates is sharper than previously assumed and begins earlier. The policy
message is clearer than it otherwise might have been, precisely because the staff leaned so far with
its forecast assumptions in order to limit the chance that the forecast overstated the risk of higher
inflation.
I believe there are some interesting similarities today to the situation we faced at the
March meeting when we raised the federal funds rate. Leading up to that meeting, the
unemployment rate had moved within a narrow range; it was near the bottom end of that range,
near a cyclical low and below estimates of NAIRU. The forecast for near-term growth at that
meeting was revised upward from the earlier forecast of trend growth. The resulting projection of
above-trend growth was accompanied by a forecast of a decline in the unemployment rate to below
its recent rate. As a result, the forecast presented a combination of utilization and growth risks that
compounded the threat of higher inflation compared to the earlier forecasts and galvanized support

9/30/97

for a tightening move. Given the changes in the forecast since the last meeting, we again face a
similar combination of utilization and growth risks going forward, and those risks are compounded
by the fact that we begin with an unemployment rate nearly 1/2 percentage point lower than was the
case in March. Fortunately, we also begin at a lower inflation rate. But as a proponent of
opportunistic disinflation, I want to hold on to this lower inflation going forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.
MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The second-quarter slowdown was so
shallow that we could easily have missed it. Consumer spending did slow to less than 1 percent,
but we had an increase in inventory investment. Even with that increase, inventories are still not
out of alignment. Growth so far in the third quarter seems to be quite robust. I am particularly
impressed by the uniform breadth of the pickup. Resource utilization has to be getting rather taut,
especially for an expansion that has lasted so long. This makes the recent inflation experience all
the more impressive.
Going forward, there seems to be considerable strength in the economy. Business fixed
investment is incredibly impressive, with support from falling computer prices. In addition, there
are favorable returns for fixed investment in a wide variety of areas, not just computers. This
strong investment performance also is supported by strong profits and cash flow, providing internal
financing. The external financing market also has been quite favorable, with strong equity and
long-term debt markets. Bank financing has also been available. The balance sheets for both
financial and nonfinancial corporations seem to be in quite good shape. With aggregate demand
appearing to hold up, I do not think there is any reason to assume that the nonfinancial sector of the
economy is going to fade unless labor becomes the dominant constraint to expansion.

9/30/97

Turning to the labor market, I have argued for a number of months that there is probably
more flexibility in that market than is implied by the current unemployment rate. But at some
point, it seems to me that flexibility has to run out. The staff's projection of 4-1/2 percent
unemployment in 1998 strained even my optimism. But I have been impressed to hear how many
people around the table have bought into that projection. So, perhaps I will have to reassess that
skepticism.
Businesses are still finding ways to economize on their workforce and attract new
workers through training programs, transportation gimmicks, and other approaches such as new
ways of looking at and trying to implement welfare-to-work initiatives. But it does seem to me that
U.S. demographics will not support job increases of 200,000 per month forever. The wage
pressures that we now see in the high-tech and skilled areas eventually will be more widespread. In
any case, the strong labor market and the business investment outlook augur well for continued
growth in consumption. This leads me to concerns about resource and supply constraints. Price
inflation has been held down by several favorable factors including the strong dollar and weakness
in the economies of international competitors that have been keeping pressure off commodity and
other supply prices. We have not had any major supply shocks for several years in oil or
agriculture or wars and so on. Even the much discussed El Nino does not seem to be having much
effect yet on prices. Progress on the deficit has helped to ease long-term interest rates, thereby
lowering financing costs. Inflation psychology appears to have been considerably reduced.
Businesses and consumers seem to be unwilling to accept price increases.
In sum, it is hard to escape the conclusion that the risk is on the upside for inflation. But
I also think we have little recent historical experience to judge the impacts of some of the factors
underlying the "new paradigm" economy. I would also throw in as significant in this argument the

9/30/97
lower federal deficits and a U.S. economy that is now engaged in worldwide expansion. Other
factors are global market integration and few worldwide supply shocks. I cannot fully buy into the
new paradigm, but I agree that its proponents raise questions for which we do not have complete
answers. It may well be that we are experiencing what is simply an elongated cycle and that more
traditional strains will soon be showing up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As we head for coffee in the next couple of
minutes, it seems to me that my notes may be a bit of a composite of what has been said around the
table. As I began to focus on this meeting, I asked myself first and foremost "what is new?" The
answer that came back is "so far, not much." The data story today seems to me to be very much as
it has been for some period of time now: strong growth, tighter labor markets, and very little
evidence of pressure on unit costs or prices. As I look at the inflationary pipeline to try to get some
clue of what may be coming our way, it is very hard to find very much in the way of new pressure.
There is some, but not very much.
With regard to indicators of economic activity, we are all very conscious of what is
happening in the labor market. We have been discussing that at length. On the other hand, we see
no pressure on unit labor costs. In my view, I don't see much pressure emerging in capacity
utilization, except perhaps New York hotel rooms, Bill (McDonough)!
MS. MINEHAN. Boston, too!
MR. KELLEY. With respect to financial indicators, one can find very little pressure in
the yield curve or in interest rate levels. On the other hand, household wealth continues to rise and
there is abundant liquidity in the economy. From the foreign side, there seems to be very little in

9/30/97
the way of new pressure, and from the side of commodities or what one might call goods inputs,
none at all.
So, on its face, the appropriate policy once again looks like steady as she goes,
asymmetric, high alert. In short, little visibly has changed. And yet, one has to feel, or at least I do,
a certain heightening tension driven mainly by the fact that the slowdown we had been expecting
did not happen. It is not happening now, and there seems to be very little likelihood that it is going
to unless it gets a boost or a jolt from here or elsewhere. During the past four quarters, growth has
averaged 3.8 percent, which is very strong. Unemployment has come down over that period from
5.3 to 4.8 percent. And no matter how guilty one may feel about harboring heretical notions about
lower NAIRUs or higher productivity or shifting paradigms or whatever, one thing for sure, as
many people have observed, is that there are limits somewhere. What is going to keep the
economy from pushing right through them, wherever they are? There is plenty of liquidity
available at reasonable rates. We are beginning to worry about M2. Household wealth continues to
rise; consumers are very confident; jobs are abundant. Our foreign trade prospects seem to be
favorable for more domestic growth. There is no meaningful fiscal drag. The Greenbook calls for
two more strong quarters before any slowing occurs, and when it does occur, it is at least in part
being pushed by the possibility of a stock market break and rising interest rates.
Mr. Chairman, at the last meeting you commented that there are signs that we may be
running out the string, and it seems to me that those signs are multiplying.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On that, we will go for coffee.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Mr. Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank your, Mr. Chairman. The sustained strength in
final demand since the last FOMC meeting and the staff projection of

9/30/97

building inflation pressures suggest that the question facing the Committee
remains whether, or perhaps when, to tighten the stance of policy.
Prices in financial markets do not seem to embody this asymmetry of
risks or potential Federal Reserve action, perhaps because, as Mike noted,
investors have become entranced by visions of a new era. I say investors
because, once again, a survey of economists at primary dealers taken in
advance of this meeting indicated that a majority--albeit a slimmer one than
in the near past--expects policy firming by year-end. Nonetheless, futures
market rates and the overall slope of the yield curve appear to make no
allowance for such a rise in the federal funds rate. Moreover, equity prices
continue to advance and credit remains readily available, both of which are
consistent with a lack of concern that real interest rates or labor costs might
move higher to impinge on the growth of income and profits and the ability
of households and firms to service debt. If the economists, including the
staff, are right that risks are tilted toward higher inflation, investor behavior
is complicating the Committee's job because markets are not acting as an
automatic stabilizer; indeed, the vigilantes seem to have been lulled to sleep
so that financial conditions, if anything, are exacerbating any economic
overshooting that may be occurring.
Market mistakes are not usually prolonged, implying that this
circumstance would correct itself to some extent without System action if
cost pressures do, in fact, develop. As profit margins disappoint, equity
prices will fall and lenders may become a bit more cautious. However,
such a reaction, by itself, is unlikely to be sufficient or timely enough to
forestall potentially emergent inflation pressures. With financial markets
determined to be optimistic, markets are more likely to follow than to lead
inflation pressures.
If the Committee sees a high likelihood that the economy is or soon
will be producing beyond its sustainable potential, action sooner rather than
later would be called for. The longer disequilibrium is allowed to persist,
the more disruptive can be the actions required to correct it. The
Committee has been most successful in recent years and has minimized
needed policy corrections by acting preemptively. Following that pattern, if
the Committee were confident of an intensification of inflation pressures, it
might want to act at this meeting.
But such preemptive policymaking presupposes a level of conviction
about the outlook that the Committee may not have today, given the
uncertainties about price/output relationships. Allowing for the possibility
that there may be no disequilibrium lies behind the arguments for
alternative B. In short, the persistent, unexpected, favorable behavior of
inflation of late may call into question our understanding of the underlying
inflation process. Moreover, some of the projected impetus to inflation

9/30/97

comes from what will be, not what is already, in the pipeline: the projected
further edging down of the unemployment rate given strong final demands
and the ending of the restraining force of declining import prices. All of
these inflation influences seem to have been particularly difficult to pin
down of late, and the Committee may want to wait for surer indications that
inflation will increase before tightening. After all, unnecessary tightening
does have costs in terms of lost output and market disruption. Moreover,
with inflation already fairly low, the Committee may view the gains from
the resulting additional, unintended disinflation as relatively small. Action
once those surer indications begin to emerge may be effective in restraining
inflation, provided such action is prompt, and perhaps relatively forceful,
but the new elements and uncertainties in the current situation make such
indicators--short of the "smoking gun" of a string of adverse inflation data-difficult to identify.
One class of indicators the Committee has used in the past is early
signs of pipeline price pressures. Price increases for commodities or goods
at early stages of production and the stretching out of supplier deliveries
and the like have been important not so much for their direct implications
for business costs, but rather as indications of pressures on resource
capacity. They were prominent in 1994, helping to cue the need for more
tightening than originally anticipated, and timely System action did forestall
a more general increase in inflation. However, at this time, with industrial
capacity more ample than labor force potential, the cost and price pressures
may be less visible and more gradual. Rather than easily observed
increases in crude and intermediate materials prices, pipeline pressures may
manifest themselves in a steady upcreep in labor costs and a gradual
squeeze on profits.
Another indication that tightening is in order might be the continued
growth of aggregate demand beyond that of the economy's potential. It
was the threat of persisting unsustainable growth in demand that motivated
the Committee's firming in March, and the current circumstances closely
resemble those the Committee faced at that time, but with utilization rates
in labor and capital markets now higher. Nonetheless, the Committee may
see some differences in the situations that counsel caution. For one, the real
federal fund rates probably has been edging higher without Committee
action, as inflation and inflation expectations appear to have abated. For
another, the flow of unexpectedly good inflation news has been extended,
suggesting a changing environment or at least more uncertainty. Despite
these possibilities, the Committee at some point still may want to consider
tightening on the basis of above-trend growth and before even pipeline
pressures on prices or labor costs are clearly evident. Growth that is
accompanied by rising utilization rates is, by definition, unsustainable, even
in a new era. If there are no signs of moderation, the Committee may desire

9/30/97
some additional assurance that it is not accommodating a major build-up of
inflation pressures and subsequent correction.
In the staff forecast, above-trend growth going forward is supported by
accommodative financial conditions, despite high real short-term interest
rates. This circumstance suggests another set of factors that might
contribute to a decision to tighten--signs that financial conditions were
becoming even easier. Unless potential output can expand considerably
faster than now seems likely, substantial further increases in equity prices,
for example, or a drop in the dollar, or a further turn toward easier credit
conditions would seem inconsistent with demand being damped by enough
to prevent a further overrun of potential output. The staff does expect most
nominal interest rates to edge higher, even if the stance of policy remains
unchanged in coming months. But a particularly worrisome sign might be
an increase in inflation expectations not coupled with an increase in real
rates. This combination could be read as signaling doubt about the Federal
Reserve's resolve to limit any potential increase in inflation. Thus far, we
have been living with the virtuous part of the circle of inflation
determination: Damped inflation expectations have themselves helped to
hold down inflation despite high resource utilization. While the key
expectations in this regard are those on Main Street, a deterioration on Wall
Street that persisted could be an early warning that the circle might turn
vicious.
Money growth might be one element in assessing whether financial
conditions have been too accommodative. The expansion of both M2 and
M3 has been much more rapid in recent months than the staff had
anticipated. In part, the overage seems to reflect asset and liability
allocation decisions unrelated to current or future spending: Demand for
M2 assets picked up in the wake of the stock market weakness in August,
and was reflected in particular in rapid growth of money market funds; M3
has been boosted by bank decisions to fund in U.S. rather than Eurodollar
deposit markets. But rapid growth in M3 also is consistent with ample
resources being available to the banking system to support continued
aggressive lending. And strength in M2 was broader than just money
funds--nearly all major categories came in above our expectations. In
recent years, with M2 demand more stable and opportunity costs not
varying much, quarterly variations in money growth have been roughly
correlated with quarterly variations in the rate of expansion of nominal
GDP. In this context, the third-quarter pickup in M2 growth looked
anomalous relative to the estimated slowing of nominal GDP, but some of
the latter now appears to be in the process of being revised away. We are
predicting a relatively sharp slowing of M2 growth over the months of the
fourth quarter to keep quarterly average growth from greatly exceeding
predicted GDP. Money running appreciably above our forecast might be

9/30/97

one indication that financial conditions were accommodating somewhat
stronger spending than anticipated.
At this point, a tightening would catch markets unawares, and could
provoke a considerable reaction. Such a market reaction would arise both
because participants, at least those controlling the investments, do not
believe that tightening is necessary, but because they also may feel that they
have been encouraged in this belief by Federal Reserve statements. To
some extent market reactions, occasionally strong, are desirable because
changes in interest and exchange rates and in equity prices are key links in
the transmission channels for policy. Strong reactions and surprises also
are inevitable from time to time in an uncertain economic environment in
which the Committee's assessment of the requirements of policy may not
always match the markets'. Moreover, a sense that the markets needed to
be primed for every action could constrain the Committee undesirably,
tying its hands to act or not at certain times depending on market
preparation. In these regards, market surprise is just the counterpart of
macroeconomic uncertainty and flexibility in policymaking. But surprise
can also grow out of misunderstanding. If markets are to have a chance to
perform their stabilizing roles, they need to understand the concerns of the
Committee and the risks it sees. These can be clarified in the Minutes and
elsewhere without pre-committing the Committee to particular policy
actions or necessarily expecting that the markets will share the Committee's
views and expectations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Questions for Don?
MR. JORDAN. Don, you mentioned that a substantial slowing in the growth of M2 was
necessary for such growth to be consistent with the staff forecast of nominal GDP in the fourth
quarter. The Bluebook has M2 growth down to 4 percent in November and December. This
suggests to me that the growth of overall commercial bank balance sheets--whether we focus on the
demand for credit, the supply of credit, or some interaction between them--also has to decelerate
very sharply from what we have seen in recent months. The balance sheets still have to balance.
Given an unchanged funds rate and the Greenbook-type forecast of the real economy, what
produces that significant deceleration in the growth of bank balance sheets and therefore money
growth?

9/30/97
MR. KOHN. We have a modest deceleration in bank balance sheets in the fourth
quarter. We do not have a major deceleration. Let me start with the bank balance sheet picture.
We do not find the relationship between those balance sheets and money growth to be very tight.
Certainly, the relationship between M2 growth and bank balance sheets is not at all tight. There are
just too many other sources of funds for banks besides M2 funds. In fact, we have found that the
relationship of the balance sheets and M3 also has not been very tight. One reason is that when
banks substitute domestic dollar borrowings for Eurodollar borrowings, that tends to boost M3
growth and vice-versa. The other factor has to do with the institution-only money funds. There has
been a trend for those money funds to compete aggressively for corporate cash management
business. In effect, corporations are moving away from the management of their own liquidity by
putting it in the hands of the institution-only money funds. We include the institution-only money
funds in M3; we do not include corporations' own direct holdings of commercial paper or Treasury
bills. Therefore, that substitution also has tended to cut the link between M3 and bank credit. We
look at that when we do our M3 projections. We try to make sure the residual funding of bank
credit, other than that provided by the monetary aggregates, is sensible, but we do not force M2,
M3, and bank credit to conform to the same growth path. We see a little slowing in bank credit
growth in the fourth quarter, but not much. It has been very strong. Business loan growth in
particular has been very robust, and we think that such growth will slow a little but still remain
quite high. We have some further increase in business borrowing needs and some flattening out, to
a certain extent at least, in the growth of profits.
MR. JORDAN. Your answer says that we can get a slowing in the broad money
measures without a slowing in the growth of aggregate bank credit. You also suggested in your
earlier remarks that if we do not see the slower growth of, say, M2 that you are now projecting, that

9/30/97
might be evidence that we are not getting the slowing in nominal demand. If it is not an
opportunity cost argument, what is the argument that produces the slowing in M2 growth?
MR. KOHN. We track M2 growth to the projected increases in nominal GDP. The
slowing in the fourth quarter in M2 growth arises largely from our sense that there has been a lot of
M2 built up over the months of the third quarter. There is enough to finance the nominal GDP that
is forecast for the fourth quarter. In fact, there is almost more than enough because, even with our
projected slowing in M2 growth, we have a slight decline in velocity predicted for the fourth
quarter, which is an unusual event these days. Basically, we are saying that there is enough
liquidity out there to finance the predicted nominal GDP with only moderate further M2 growth. If
we saw much more rapid further growth, we would wonder why people are accumulating those M2
assets. We would have to look carefully. There could be an asset allocation situation that was not
related to spending, but it could also be that people were realizing more income and doing more
spending.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any other questions for Don? [Pause] If not,
then let me get started.
I think the incoming indicators are pointing more clearly to underlying trends in this
economy, although they are scarcely adding to our understanding of these trends. Let me start with
what I think is the most interesting event of recent weeks, the extraordinary acceleration in capital
investment. A big increase in capital investment this late in the business cycle is really quite
startling. If we focus on the orders pattern, we see it suddenly take off. You will recall that this
expansion in capital investment started to accelerate in 1993 after a very sluggish period and has
progressed at a fairly pronounced rate. This suggests that anticipated rates of return on investments
have risen. More precisely, prospective internal rates of return must be rising or else we cannot

9/30/97
explain why so many firms are undertaking large investment programs. Part of the explanation is
unquestionably the desire to expand capacity. That is especially the case in the high-tech area
where there has been very substantial investment, a not insignificant part of which has been for
capacity expansion. But there also is very little doubt that the plant managers who propose these
new investments anticipate very significant improvements in the efficiency of their operations, and
that ultimately leads to increased productivity. They look at it as cost reduction, but on a
consolidated basis it obviously nets out to a significant drop in the ratio of hours to output, the
inverse of productivity.
We have several indications that the prospective productivity improvements may be
materializing. First, the earnings figures still seem to be rising. It is too early to get a good fix on
the third quarter--obviously no reports for the quarter have come out--but security analysts'
estimates do show what appears to be a seasonally adjusted rise in the earnings of S&P 500
companies for the third quarter. Second, there also is a quite surprising acceleration in
manufacturing productivity in the data through August, and it is now running at an annual rate
somewhere around 7-1/2 percent. To be sure, the August figure is a little suspect because, as you
may recall, the initial estimate of industrial production is based in part on hours worked coupled
with a presumed productivity number. But that is not the case for July. Apparently, there was a
quite significant and surprisingly strong rise in electric power use, and all other indicators suggest
that July IP was quite strong. So, manufacturing productivity appears to be rising at an annual rate
of about 7-1/2 percent for the third quarter.
Third, although we have little available data, the evidence we do have for various types
of facilities is consistent with a general pattern of improved efficiency and flexibility. I have
mentioned before that with the ratio of unfilled orders to shipments declining in the capital goods

9/30/97

area, specifically excluding aircraft, we are getting a pronounced and inexorable decline in the lead
times on the deliveries of capital equipment. In a sense, this is consistent with the product cycle in
a variety of other areas. There is no doubt that we are seeing a fairly marked decline in lead
patterns and an increase in the ability of companies to meet unanticipated demand rather quickly
through new facilities, whereas they could not do that before in any readily observable sense. We
get confirmation of this phenomenon if we compare the vendor performance numbers of the NAPM
with the capacity utilization data, either for primary processing or for total manufacturing. What
we see is progressively lower vendor performance numbers at successive peaks in activity. This
means that the bottlenecks and shortages are falling relative to any constant operating rate. This is,
in effect, consistent with the declining lead times. At the end of the day, one would presume that
we could keep squeezing and squeezing and, as indeed the new era people like to say, capacity
would no longer be a restraint. If we literally stayed with the facilities that are coming on stream,
there is a strange degree of verifiability of that. We can see that there are very few constraints, very
few shortages. For example, the list of shortages we get from NAPM now has one or two items,
whereas we used to get 15 or 20. Something different is happening in the facilities area. This has
led a large number of executives, mainly in the corporate area which is where the forefront of the
new era issue is arising, to conclude that technology is continuously enabling facilities to be less
and less a constraint on activity. Indeed, when we include the globalization factor, it looks as
though inflation is dead, the world has changed, and the central bank ought to get out of business
one way or the other.
The major element that is missing in that argument is biology! Biology is what one
looks at when we are trying to find the lead time, not on facilities, but on people. I know of no
evidence suggesting that that factor has been altered in any significant manner. As a consequence,

9/30/97
leaving aside the question of the unemployment rate, the NAIRU or whatever, we have a
fundamental disequilibrium in the labor market best characterized by the fact that employment is
rising by 2 million each year and the population of people of working age who wish to work,
including immigration, is going up 1 million annually. The 1 million difference between those two
statistics over the last three or four years may be broken down into a net flow of 600,000
individuals per year who moved from unemployment to employment and another net flow of
400,000 people per year who moved from "not in the labor force but say they want a job" to being
employed. Remember, the definition of unemployment requires that a person be making an active
effort to secure a job in the previous five weeks. The consequence of saying "I would like a job,
but I have not been looking" is that it throws that person out of the labor force.
The group of people outside the labor force who say they want a job has contributed
almost as much as the decline in unemployment to that difference between employment increases
and the growth of the population of people who wish to work. This group of people is now at the
lowest proportion to the working age population since 1970. I cite the year 1970 solely because the
chart I got from the staff goes back only that far. There have been some very dramatic declines in
their number since 1996 as employers have drawn very heavily from that group. We do not need to
consider the NAIRU and the unemployment rate because, while they obviously are more
sophisticated approaches to this issue, we do not have to get terribly sophisticated. All we have to
do is to observe where the unemployed people are, and there clearly are fewer and fewer of them.
Since early 1996, we have seen a rise in average hours worked. That is another way of
suggesting that the pressures that we are seeing in this taut labor market are inducing employers to
squeeze the available supply of workers. If the supply were really there, we would not be getting
this type of pressure on the average workweek. I think this pressure has been the equivalent of

9/30/97
about 500,000 additional workers at an annual rate, so that the comparison would really be 2-1/2
million versus 1 million.
I have argued before that we have not seen an acceleration in wages because of the job
insecurity phenomenon. We have seen significant evidence of that phenomenon in the last five
years. The latest evidence that has come to my attention is data on the quite dramatic increase in
the number of people aged 25 to 34 who are going back to college and the huge increase in the
amount of on-the-job training. There is an awareness that one can no longer count on getting
lifelong job skills just by getting a college degree or even a high school degree. What we are
looking at is still, as far as I can judge, a fear of job skill obsolescence and a significant shift toward
job security in lieu of wage gains.
I have maintained in raising this issue over the years that there is a limit as to how far
this job insecurity effect can go. We are beginning to see some signs that that limit has been
reached. Earlier polls indicated that from 1991 to 1995 job insecurity or fear of job layoffs had
risen very significantly despite the tightening of the labor market, but the responses in these polls
have now shaded off in the other direction. The proportion of people in the labor force who
decided voluntarily to leave their job to seek another, which had been exceptionally low for quite a
long period of time, has now popped up, suggesting less job insecurity. So, the data that tended to
argue for job insecurity are beginning to shift a little. They have not reversed sharply, but they are
beginning to be shaded.
The question that we are running up against is that all of this is plausible, but in effect we
still have negligible inflation in the system. It may very well be that productivity increases are
creating enough in the way of absorption of hourly labor costs to prevent rising prices. Indeed,
there is no evidence to suggest that there is any pipeline inflation or any other type of inflation.

9/30/97
The fundamental disequilibrium, and I don't see how we can get around it, is the fact that
the rate of increase in overall demand is creating a demand for employment that cannot be satisfied
indefinitely. The trouble is that we don't know where that pressure point is located, but it has to
exist. I think, as Mike Kelley said, there have to be limits. Larry Meyer also said that in a speech
the other day. We do not know exactly where the limits are at this point, but the longer we stay on
this course, the more this disequilibrium continues to spread. It is conceivable that productivity
could accelerate to the point that labor requirements fall without a change in overall domestic
demand. There is no evidence of which I am aware to suggest that outcome because employment
still seems to be growing at a fairly good clip. It is conceivable that we may suddenly find
employment growth starting to fall short of its current trend while output growth is maintained,
which would suggest that productivity is accelerating, but at the moment there is no evidence of
that in the data.
Although it is conceivable that we may get bailed out by a sudden discontinuous
acceleration in productivity growth, that is something that has not occurred in the past to my
knowledge. There is no doubt, however, that a lot of the synergies of the new technologies are
emerging. That development is producing very large investment opportunities. The joining of
lasers and fiber optics has created huge demands for telecommunications investment. The
continuous breakthroughs in the computer area in conjunction with the new communications
systems created and are now fostering the extraordinary expansion in the Internet. So, one can
argue that it is possible that we could get enough acceleration in productivity to close the gap
between labor supply and labor demand. However, the gap looks so large to me that I will suggest
that arithmetically we would need a full percentage point acceleration in productivity increases to
close the gap. Is it possible? Yes. Is it likely? I do not think we can depend on that.

9/30/97
With respect to policy, my view is that we are getting repeated reprieves because the
price level is not changing much. I do not think we should move today, but I do think the
probability that we will be forced to move at the next meeting has gone up quite considerably. I
don't know how high that probability is, and I do not know what we would do if we ended up with
a CPI of zero in the next report. We will be getting the ECI between now and the next meeting,
and it could show an increase of 1 percent. I doubt it, but who knows? In any event, I think we are
getting close to a policy move. It is important, for all the reasons that a lot of you have stated, to be
in front of the curve. We are not arguing that the probability of rising inflation has increased, but
the possibility that we may be wrong is rising. You do not need an above 50 percent probability of
being wrong to take out insurance. I don't know what the data are going to look like in the next
four or five weeks, but my guess at this stage is that there is easily a 50/50 chance that we will
decide to move in November because the presumption that we can wait until just before Christmas
to move is not going to be something about which a lot of us are going to be enthusiastic. In any
event, I am putting on the table a "B" directive with continued asymmetry. Vice Chair.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I very much believe that what you
have recommended is what we should do, and let me briefly give some reasons. The factors
leading to a combination of good economic growth and ever better price performance--a firm
dollar, restrained wage demands, and the excellent performance of health benefit costs--clearly
have to be transitory and cannot be depended on to continue to give us the present combination of
favorable developments as we move forward. I do not think we can bet on faster productivity gains
because such a bet would involve a leap in the dark. We have a sufficient basis in the transitory
factors that I just mentioned to explain why we have had the good economic performance.

9/30/97
Therefore, I think it would be bad policy to maintain the present stance in the expectation that
productivity gains might bail us out.
If that is the case and policy needs to be changed, then the question obviously is, why
wait? We have been telling the American people, who are infinitely more important than the
market participants, that the purpose of the Federal Reserve is to create sustained economic growth
and that price stability is a means to that end. With sustained economic growth clearly taking place
and with price performance even better than anyone had anticipated, including us, we need to do
some informing of the public before we move. Since the likelihood is, as you have suggested, that
we will wish to firm policy at the next meeting, I encourage you to seize an opportunity in a speech
or Congressional testimony or some other avenue where you can lay out the line of thought that
you just gave, including the wonderful news that we have fewer discouraged workers, more people
coming into the workforce, and all the other favorable developments that, as you suggested, can be
and should be mentioned as evidence of the great success achieved in the functioning of the U.S.
economy. I think that type of presentation to the public would make people understand, though not
all would like it, why we would choose to firm policy in the near future, and I encourage you to
make that presentation. In my view, that is the kind of thing that has to be done by the Chairman of
the Committee. Others can say what they like to be supportive, but it really is only the Chairman
who speaks for the Committee. Therefore, I think it is important that you do that before the next
meeting.
I very much believe that at the present time "B" asymmetric is the right policy choice.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Rivlin.
MS. RIVLIN. I agree with the policy recommendation and also with Bill McDonough's
notion that we should be talking more about why we think the risks are on the upside. That said,

9/30/97
however, I think I am a little less convinced than you that we will have to move in November or
December.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I am saying there is a 50/50 probability; what are you
saying?
MS. RIVLIN. All right, you said 50/50; I heard something stronger than 50/50. I would
say the odds are perhaps a little less than that. That is because I am persuaded that we are dealing
with a much less inflation-prone economy than we were, and I am a little less persuaded by the
biology argument in part because it depends on a fixed labor force. I'm not sure that our labor-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, it depends on a fixed population.
MS. RIVLIN. All right, it depends on a fixed population.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And fixed immigration.
MS. RIVLIN. Okay, but that is what I am questioning. If some of our labor force is in
Bombay or Mexico, and we have much more flexibility in outsourcing and even in calling on highskilled people in distant places, then this argument is a little less overwhelming. I guess I also have
been a little more skeptical about the job insecurity explanation of why we have had such limited
wage increases. That puts a lot of the explanation on the worker side. I think we also have had a
strong disinclination on the employer side to grant wage increases because of the correct perception
that the economy is very competitive for numerous reasons, including the reasons we have been
talking about. That said, I think we need to accumulate more evidence before taking action, but
your policy recommendation is the right one for today.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. Could I add a comment? Just a brief one?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sure.

9/30/97

VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. We have been doing a good deal of work at our
Bank on where inflation stems from on the wage side, and it is not in the goods-producing
industries. Therefore, the labor force that does exist in Bombay and Mexico does not help to
explain our wage behavior because inflation comes from the services part of the economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Bombay example involves services.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. But for most services there is no import
competition.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Bombay example relates basically to the use of
computer software. It involves very few people.
VICE CHAIRMAN MCDONOUGH. The portion of the workforce that is most likely to
give us the inflationary pressure, at least on the basis of our analysis, is in the services areas where
there is no possibility of competition with imported services. That pressure initially kicks off in the
wages of service workers, but with a not very long lag it seems to spill over into general wage
inflation and over into the price side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, given uncertainties about the magnitude of a possible
supply shock, I am somewhat more comfortable with data and forecasts of nominal GDP growth
than with forecasts of the split between real GDP growth and inflation. Nominal GDP has grown
moderately over the past year and is projected to slow in both our forecast and the Greenbook. I
think there is a reasonable chance that nominal GDP growth will slow, and such an outcome would
make it unlikely that a significant inflation problem would develop. Therefore, I am willing to
leave the funds rate unchanged for now, and I can support Bluebook alternative B with asymmetric
language to the upside. I do believe, however, that a strong case can be made to take out a small

9/30/97
insurance policy against the likelihood of higher future inflation, but delaying such a decision until,
for example, November is not likely to be the difference between success and failure.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, without putting odds on what we need to do at the next
meeting, I think I understand where you are coming from, and I can support your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE. I agree with your recommendation, and I have an open mind about what
will occur in November and December.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Moskow.
MR. MOSKOW. I agree with your recommendation, Mr. Chairman. I do think that the
probability is higher that we will have to move in November than I thought it was, say, four or so
weeks ago. I agree with President McDonough that it is very important for us to alert the American
people to our thinking. I know this is a delicate matter because we are waiting for data to come in
during the next several weeks before we know for sure what the probabilities are going to be. But I
do think it is important that you lay the groundwork for any move that you anticipate the
Committee would want to make in the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thought I was doing that in the July Humphrey-Hawkins
testimony. It turned out that instead of the bond market falling by up to a point or so, as I thought it
would after that testimony, it went in the other direction. The market's response depends on what it
wants to hear. One of the things I have learned is that sending a message is very difficult unless it
is absolutely unequivocal because people hear what they want to hear. It is a tricky matter.
MR. MOSKOW. I thought you were very effective in sending a message earlier this
year.

9/30/97
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think the March message worked well. President
Guynn.
MR. GUYNN. I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Melzer.
MR. MELZER. Thanks, Alan. I would prefer alternative C but I could accept your
recommendation. The stage setting is probably very important, although I think we need to
recognize that at some point it may be only actions that will get the message across. I think, as was
clear in my comments today and earlier, that the odds of our having to act are quite high. In
sending a message, I believe it is very important that we focus on the benefits of low inflation and
specifically the benefits of locking in the very low rates of inflation that we have as opposed to the
evils of rising inflation. That approach has the potential of playing better, and Bill McDonough had
some good thoughts with respect to your talking about this. We cannot come across as taking
credit for the current economy, but we can certainly relate some of our argument to the benefits we
are enjoying today in this economy that is creating a lot of jobs and opportunity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Stem.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I, too, accept your recommendation largely
because I think there is still sufficient uncertainty to warrant caution. While it is tempting to take
the attitude that we ought to sit back and enjoy this economy, I see a danger in that. The danger is
that we will wait too long before acting, as has occurred on occasion in the past. We ought to
remain sensitive to that possibility, and that leads me to view November with a good deal of
interest.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Meyer.

9/30/97
MR. MEYER. Mr. Chairman, I agree with you and I endorse all elements of your policy
recommendation: no change in the funds rate today; maintaining an asymmetric directive; and,
importantly, recognition that there is an increased possibility, if not a presumption, that a tightening
move will be justified in November, assuming the data between now and then confirm the thrust of
the Greenbook forecast.
My view is that monetary policy should continue to lean against the cyclical winds and
be cautiously preemptive. In my view, such a preemptive move might well be in order at the next
meeting. By that time, we will have two additional employment reports, the third-quarter ECI
report, and a better feel for the momentum of the economy early in the fourth quarter. This timing
is also consistent with my view that there are windows of opportunity for policy tightening. We are
not, in my judgment, at such a window at this moment, but I expect we may be approaching one. It
is easier to change policy, for example, when the financial markets anticipate a move and when the
public will understand it. It is easier for this reason to tighten when growth is above trend and the
unemployment rate is moving lower than when the economy has slowed to trend and the
unemployment rate has stabilized, whatever its level.
In my view, to maintain a preemptive course, to sustain the decline in inflation we have
recently achieved, and to take advantage of a possible window of opportunity, we should be
prepared to tighten in November if the data confirm continued above-trend growth and rising
utilization rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Broaddus.
MR. BROADDUS. Mr. Chairman, I can accept your recommendation. I also agree
strongly with the thrust of your comment that the probability of having to tighten in November has
risen significantly. I hope that you will make some public comment, and I agree with Bill

9/30/97
McDonough and others that doing so would be productive. I recognize that it is difficult to deliver
the message, but I think some comment would be in order.
I would just add that a principal reason in my view for the considerable success of our
policy over the last three years as a whole is our consistent commitment to hold the line on inflation
built largely on our preemptive tightening actions in 1994. That series of actions was one of the
most successful we have undertaken in recent monetary policy history in this country. And it was
successful precisely because we acted proactively rather than reactively. Because of that, we
earned the public's confidence. There is a lot of talk about a new paradigm. I think that increased
confidence and credibility is a big part of that new paradigm. But that confidence has to be
nourished, and I think there is a good chance for you to do that in November.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Minehan.
MS. MINEHAN. I, too, am supportive of your proposal, Mr. Chairman. I also would
have supported a small preemptive move at this meeting, but I recognize that the lack of a real
smoking gun in terms of inflation, either existing or in the pipeline or guessed about, makes that
sort of recommendation a bit difficult to entertain at this point. I agree with Alice Rivlin that we
probably are facing a less inflation-prone economy than might have been the case in earlier
decades, but I also think that the factors that have contributed in a major way to this situation are
more transitory than new paradigmish and their effects may be coming to an end. I think benefit
cost increases, wage increases in the face of increasing labor shortages, and the potential for a
reduction in the value of the dollar given the large size of our external deficits will at some point
start to work together to make this less inflation-prone economy more inflation-prone. I agree with
the comments about being forward-thinking and locking in the benefits of reduced inflation.

9/30/97
I have some concern about the idea of communicating to the markets. With respect to
what you said in your Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, I told a lot of people to read the whole
testimony, not just what was in the headlines of the New York Times or the Wall Street Journal.
There was a good deal of balance in that testimony. I think it is really difficult to communicate
these things in such a way that people understand the intended message. Don Kohn made some
good comments to the effect that surprising the markets, particularly in a boom-like environment
either existing or building, is not all that bad a thing. I wonder whether we can communicate
effectively in the absence of real inflation, but I think we need to move before real inflation
materializes. In my view, anyway, there is more than a 50 percent probability of our moving at the
next meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. I think what is going on in the labor markets is a fascinating subject, one
that I wish I understood better. I also wish that our friends on the European continent understood a
lot better than I do what is going on in our labor markets. It does tell us a lot about the distribution
of the current prosperity and about how well all the wealth creation is being shared by our people.
But I am not sure it tells me a lot about the purchasing power of money, at least not in a direct way.
I also am very interested in all the discussions about capacity, capacity utilization, productivity,
efficiency, and capital formation because even though they too don't tell me anything directly
about what is going to happen to the purchasing power of money, they give important information
about things that I think directly bear on the purchasing power of money. The demand for labor is
a derived demand; it is derived from the demand for goods and services. That in turn, as Bob Parry
says, depends on nominal spending, which does have something to do with money. I am less
comfortable than Bob seemed to be that we will get the needed deceleration in nominal spending

9/30/97
growth. But with respect to the stories about productivity, capacity, capital formation, and all of
that, if the perceived real return to productive capital is rising due to technology, including both
wealth effects and substitution effects, that indicates to me that the demand for high-powered
money must be declining. But what we see is an increased demand for bank credit to finance it all.
That effect is somewhat like that associated with the old real bills doctrine when it signaled what
was interpreted as an increased demand for base money while modern theory tells us the quantity
needed to go down. We should not be seeing an acceleration in base money growth at this stage.
So, I think that we are probably late. What I would be looking for in the next six weeks is what
Don Kohn alluded to, namely the much needed deceleration in the broad measures of money. If we
do not get it, then I will conclude that we made a mistake.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Kelley.
MR. KELLEY. I concur, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Phillips.
MS. PHILLIPS. I also agree with "B" asymmetric. The strength of the economy makes
the asymmetric directive appropriate. In view of the recent inflation experience, I think there is
some time to let things develop before removing the punch bowl.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER. I agree with your recommendation today. I would keep an open mind
about the next meeting and wait and see what the data show and not be praying for bad news so we
have an excuse to do something.
With regard to 1994, I do think it was a very successful preemptive strike experience.
Two fundamental differences between now and 1994 are that we went into 1994 with a 3 percent
federal funds rate, zero in real terms, and had been there 1-1/2 years. Also, throughout 1994, we

9/30/97

had pipeline inflation going straight up. Commodity prices peaked in mid-1995 and have not gone
up since then. Those are two important things to keep in mind.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That explains why we have not moved since March.
Okay, let's have a vote on "B" asymmetric after you have read the directive.
MR. BERNARD. I will be reading from page 13 of the Bluebook: "In the
implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks conditions in reserve
markets consistent with maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 5-1/2 percent. In
the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments, a
somewhat higher federal funds rate would or a slightly lower federal funds rate might be acceptable
in the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
some moderation in the growth of M2 and M3 over coming months."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Call the roll.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman McDonough
President Broaddus
President Guynn
Governor Kelley
Governor Meyer
President Moskow
President Parry
Governor Phillips
Governor Rivlin

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is on Wednesday, November 12.
END OF MEETING

