September 29, 2008

1 of 16

Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on
September 29, 2008
A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Monday,
September 29, 2008, at 9:00 a.m. Those present were the following:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Ms. Duke
Mr. Fisher
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Plosser
Mr. Stern
Mr. Warsh
Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bullard and Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis and
Boston, respectively
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Connors, English, and Kamin, Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rosenblum, Sniderman, and
Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. Clouse, Deputy Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Ms. Edwards, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Leahy, Associate Director, Division of International Finance, Board of Governors

September 29, 2008

2 of 16

Mr. Carpenter, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Barron, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
Messrs. Fuhrer and Judd, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
and San Francisco, respectively
Ms. George, Messrs. Sellon, Sullivan, and Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Kansas City, Kansas City, Chicago, and Richmond, respectively

September 29, 2008

3 of 16

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on
September 29, 2008
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Good morning, everybody. Thank you as always
for your flexibility and meeting on short notice—particularly to Janet. How are you feeling today,
Janet?
MS. YELLEN. Fine, thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have three topics to raise with you today. First, financial
market conditions, as you know, remain quite strained, and in response to that we are proposing
some additional liquidity measures. Mostly this is informational. However, we are proposing to
increase the swap lines fairly significantly, and although you have authorized the Foreign Currency
Subcommittee to take those actions, we thought that, given the size of the change, it would be
worthwhile to bring this back to you for your attention and your vote just to get the Committee’s
agreement on this issue. The second issue is Wachovia. As you may have heard, Wachovia was
purchased, or there’s a plan to purchase, by Citigroup this morning. To facilitate that purchase, the
Board invoked the systemic risk exception, which has not been done before. So we want to give
you a chance to catch up on what’s going on there. Then third, we want to talk a bit about interest
on reserves, which will be provided in the Paulson financial rescue bill, which is supposed to be up
for a vote on Wednesday. I just want to brief you on what we’re planning in that regard. So let me
start by turning to Bill Dudley in New York. Bill, if you could give us a brief overview of the
financial conditions that motivate these actions, review the actions we’re proposing, and take Q&A,
that would be very helpful.
MR. DUDLEY. Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start with the foreign
exchange swap lines, and then I’ll talk a bit about the TAF increases and about the
balance sheet. I think Brian later is going to talk about interest on reserves in more
detail.

September 29, 2008

All of the foreign central banks that have obtained dollar swap lines in response to
dollar funding pressures in their home markets have decided, with some encouragement
on our part, to seek an increase in the size of these swap line authorizations. We just
have to hear from the Bank of Japan—I think that’s the only one that’s outstanding—but
we expect to hear that shortly. The actual draws on these lines may turn out to be
considerably less, and the amounts that are actually drawn are likely to depend on
market conditions. The large increase in authorization should be considered as
insurance in case market conditions continue to deteriorate and as reassurance to market
participants that the world’s major central banks are determined to respond in force to
mitigate dollar funding pressures. By foreign central banks, the current lines are being
doubled for the larger participants and tripled for the smaller participants. The increases
are as follows, very quickly: the Bank of Canada, $30 billion from $10 billion; the Bank
of England, $80 billion from $40 billion; the Bank of Japan, $120 billion from
$60 billion; the National Bank of Denmark, $15 billion from $5 billion; the ECB,
$240 billion from $120 billion; the Bank of Norway, $15 billion from $5 billion; the
Reserve Bank of Australia, $30 billion from $10 billion; the Swedish Riksbank,
$30 billion from $10 billion; and the Swiss National Bank, $60 billion from $30 billion.
Adding up all of this would result in an increase in our swap line authorization to
$620 billion from $290 billion previously. I think that these decisions have been made
in response to the increasing turmoil evident in interbank markets, especially for dollar
funding; and by increasing the size of the authorization significantly, the intention is to
reassure market participants that sufficient dollar funding will be available well into
2009.
The staff believes that these large increases are appropriate to reassure market
participants that the world’s central banks are prepared to take extraordinary steps as
needed to address ongoing strains in financial markets. These strains are evident in a
number of ways. First, we’ve seen a sharp rise in overnight dollar funding rates and in
term LIBOR–OIS spreads. For example, on Friday, the three-month LIBOR–OIS
spread was over 200 basis points, and in fact, LIBOR may actually understate the degree
of funding pressure. The NYFR index, which is the U.S.-based alternative to LIBOR,
has actually been much higher than LIBOR over the past week or two. So LIBOR
actually may be understated. Second, there have been many anecdotal reports of a
withdrawal of counterparties’ willingness to engage in term funding activity. So the
tenor of almost all activity in the market now is overnight. Third, there are growing
liquidity strains at major financial institutions. Obviously, Wachovia is part of that
story. Fourth, we’ve seen a significant rise in the demand for our TSLF and TAF credit.
For example, the stop-out rate for the most recent TAF auction, which was a 28-day
maturity auction, was 3.75 percent, significantly above the one-month LIBOR rate at the
time. Fifth, we’ve seen a sharp rise in PCF and PDCF borrowings. For example, on the
week ending last Wednesday, PCF credit was $39.4 billion, an increase of about
$18 billion from the previous week, and PDCF borrowing was $88 billion in the latest
week, up $68 billion from the previous week. Last, European banking strains have been
increasingly evident in recent days, especially this weekend following the announcement
of the Fortis rescue and the nationalization of B&B in the United Kingdom. The
European banking news has led to a sharp drop in the European equity markets—this

4 of 16

September 29, 2008

5 of 16

morning they’re down 2 to 3 percent—and the euro and sterling exchange rates have
dropped quite sharply against the dollar, down about 2 percent.
Now, along with this increase in authorized swap lines, Chairman Bernanke has
approved the staff recommendation for a large increase in our term auction facility
(TAF) program. We are proposing two changes in the TAF program. First, we’re
proposing to increase the 84-day TAF auction sizes to $75 billion per auction, from $25
billion. That will start with the next 84-day auction that was scheduled for October 6.
The second change is that the Chairman has approved two forward TAF auctions
totaling $150 billion. These auctions would take place in November, and they would
auction short-dated TAF funds for one-week or two-week terms over year-end.
Together, these two changes to the TAF program would increase the supply of TAF
credit to $450 billion, from $150 billion currently. The notion is that a larger
commitment to TAF funding should help ameliorate market concerns about the
availability of term funding and about the availability of such funding over year-end.
The effective dates for the swap lines and all the programs will be extended, I think, to
April 30, 2009. This would enable the foreign central banks to extend 84-day TAF
credit through year-end under their swap agreements.
Obviously, these commitments are likely to put considerable further strain on the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet. In recent days we have been offsetting the large
reserve additions with the Treasury SFP (supplementary financing program) cashmanagement bill issuance. After this week’s scheduled bill issuance, the total amount of
outstanding SFP obligations will reach $400 billion. However, we cannot rely on this
program indefinitely because the Treasury’s room under the debt limit ceiling is about
$900 billion as of early last week and is shrinking rapidly because of the SFP and other
ongoing funding commitments.
PARTICIPANT. It’s impossible to hear.
MR. FISHER. Someone has had a BlackBerry on during the last two or three sentences.
MS. DANKER. New York, in particular, could you make sure you have no cell phones or
BlackBerrys near the microphones.
MR. DUDLEY. I’ll make sure everything is off. Probably I’m the culprit. Poetic
justice. Let me just repeat the last stuff on the SFP. After this week’s scheduled bill
issuance, the total amount of SFP obligations will be $400 billion. We can’t keep
relying on that program indefinitely, though, because the Treasury’s room under the
debt limit ceiling, which was $900 billion as of early last week, is shrinking rapidly
because of that program and other ongoing funding commitments. So that’s where the
interest on reserves legislation comes in. Assuming that the Congress enacts that
legislation this week, we will be able to pay interest on reserves. I’ll leave that to Brian
to talk about in more detail. Thank you. I’m happy to take any questions.

September 29, 2008

6 of 16

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. So just to clarify, we’ll be asking you for the following
two actions after the question-and-answer period. One is, again, that although the Foreign Currency
Subcommittee was authorized to increase swaps, because we are essentially doubling the
outstanding swap lines, we would like to go back to the Committee for a vote, or to hear your views,
to get approval for those swap lines, which pending approval, we plan to announce shortly, right?
MR. DUDLEY. At 10 a.m.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Yes, very shortly. The other thing, which also requires a vote,
is that, in order to do three-month swaps over year-end, some of the three-month swaps would go
beyond January 30. So we’re asking for the extension not for all programs but only for the swap
lines to April 30. Is that right?
MR. DUDLEY. Yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. So that’s the second request—to extend the swap line
authorizations to April 30 of next year. With those two points in mind, are there any questions for
Bill? President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was confused about April 30. I thought I
heard Bill Dudley say that he’s requesting the TAF be extended to April 30. Is it just the swap lines,
or is it both? Can I get some clarification?
MR. DUDLEY. Just the swap lines. The TAF program doesn’t need an authorization
because it is just within the discount window program.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. The issue of unusual and exigent is not coming up here
because we’re not dealing with any section 13(3) lending today. President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d just like to review by asking a question. The
swap lines are very large now. Could we review what could go wrong for our balance sheet in a

September 29, 2008

7 of 16

not-so-pleasant scenario? Are these actions consistent—and I think they are—with the substantial
deleveraging of the financial system that we’re trying to make take place in an orderly fashion but
we can’t resist the natural forces that have to take place? Thank you.
MR. DUDLEY. I think that’s correct. Our strategy all along has been not to prevent the
deleveraging or the unwinding that developed earlier but to stretch it out a little so fewer things
break. The swap lines are just one more tool to help that process unfold without severe systemic
consequences occurring. Obviously, things are breaking, even with all the tools that we’ve rolled
out. So I think that just suggests that more force needs to be applied. Clearly, confidence in the
markets is extraordinarily poor and fragile, and that’s another reason that an escalation in the
authorizations is important—to reassure people that the central banks are prepared to be there, if
necessary.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Of course, for the balance sheet—and we’ll discuss that also
with interest on reserves—it has the benefit of having zero credit risk because the other central
banks are our counterparties. President Evans, did you have another comment?
MR. EVANS. Well, I suppose you answered my question there. It just seems that, in
looking at the TAF auctions, there are a number of foreign institutions that, because I don’t follow
it, I’m not familiar with, and these are the types of institutions that are borrowing under these
agreements. But I suppose that the foreign central banks are careful with their counterparties.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for Bill? If there are no questions, since Bill
has to go and get ready for the announcement—sorry, President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. It’s not pertinent to this particular decision, but I was going to ask Bill
whether there are any other sorts of measures or tools that the Desk in New York is considering—
that are being explored or thought about going forward?

September 29, 2008

8 of 16

MR. DUDLEY. We’re looking at a lot of different things to potentially make the
management of reserves more effective and to provide more support for the market. But we don’t
have anything that is close to being put forward at this time. We’re always looking at
contingencies, what other tools are available, and what other options might be available, but there’s
nothing that I would say is imminent.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, could I just add one thing? Maybe Eric
could speak to this. I think the only other thing at the moment that deserves some quick reflection is
whether the Federal Reserve should be modifying the facilities it put in place for money market
funds last week. A team of people across the System is looking at a range of options there and is
likely to give a recommendation to the Chairman sometime later today. My own sense is that it is
the only area in which there is an immediate, compelling need and there’s active exploration of
some escalation options.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. With the anticipated passage of the fiscal plan, a lot of our
intellectual talents are going to be harnessed trying to support the Treasury in thinking about their
auctions and other strategies that they’re going to use. The Board, New York, and others have been
working very closely with the Treasury staff. Other questions? President Lacker, do you have a
question?
MR. LACKER. Yes. What do we know about the time line for the implementation of the
Treasury’s program of insuring money market mutual funds and how that would work?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. They have already put in place a program that insures deposits
that were there before a fixed date. In other words, new deposits are not protected. They made that
change because they were generating runs from banks into money market mutual funds and the
banks were complaining.

September 29, 2008

9 of 16

MR. LACKER. Now, Vice Chairman Geithner, does the recommendation likely to come
forward involve expanding or contracting the coverage?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. It is obviously not my decision, but they are looking at
options that go in the direction of expanding the liquidity support provided both to the agent banks
and perhaps directly to the funds themselves.
MR. LACKER. But any change in the space of qualified commercial paper?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Eric may be a little closer to this than I am at the
moment. Again, they’re looking at it broadly, conceptually. The options fall into expanding the
scope of the types of funds covered by the—what’s it called, Eric?—the AMLF.
MR. ROSENGREN. That’s right.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Second would be some expanded section 23A approvals
to facilitate what the clearing banks need to do to provide liquidity. Another option would be to
expand the scope of instruments that might be supported through that program. Another option
might be to lend directly to money funds against a broader class of assets, and of course, it’s
possible that the Treasury may rejigger, change, expand, or add to their guaranty.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions, comments? Let me ask: Scott, are you
prepared to state the resolutions we would like? Brian? Anyone? I’d like to note for the record that
all three of the staff briefers today—Bill, Brian, and Scott—worked all night last night. So we have
dedicated employees here in the System. Brian.
MR. MADIGAN. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I’ll read a resolution regarding the swap lines:
“The Federal Open Market Committee authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to take
the following actions to amend the existing temporary swap arrangements with foreign central
banks as follows: with the Bank of Canada, to increase the aggregate amount to $30 billion; with

September 29, 2008

10 of 16

the Bank of England to increase the aggregate amount to $80 billion; with the Bank of Japan to
increase the aggregate amount to $120 billion; with the Danish National Bank to increase the
aggregate amount to $15 billion; with the European Central Bank to increase the aggregate amount
to $240 billion; with the Norges Bank to increase the aggregate amount to $15 billion; with the
Reserve Bank of Australia to increase the aggregate amount to $30 billion; with the Swedish
Riksbank to increase the aggregate amount to $30 billion; with the Swiss National Bank to increase
the aggregate amount to $60 billion. In each case the System Open Market Account Manager
would be authorized to determine appropriate liquidity buffers. The FOMC also extends the current
delegation of authority to the Foreign Currency Subcommittee until April 30, 2009.”
MS. DANKER. And it extends the expiration dates.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. He has that. Okay. So there’s a motion. Any further
questions or comments? If there’s no objection, may I take a vote now? Debbie.
MS. DANKER.
Chairman Bernanke
Vice Chairman Geithner
Governor Duke
President Fisher
Governor Kohn
Governor Kroszner
President Pianalto
President Plosser
President Stern
Governor Warsh

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. I’m going to excuse Bill if he wants to
go. There he goes. [Laughter] All right. Let me turn now to the second item, which is a briefing
by Scott Alvarez, who as I said worked all night on the Wachovia situation. If President Lacker
would like to add anything, he is certainly welcome to do so. Scott.

September 29, 2008

11 of 16

MR. ALVAREZ. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On Friday, Wachovia experienced
significant liquidity pressures, and its management concluded that it would have
difficulty funding itself this week. So the board of directors of Wachovia authorized the
management to begin entertaining merger offers. Wells Fargo and Citi quickly emerged
as the leading candidates among a group of candidates, but by Sunday it became clear
that those two, which were the only remaining candidates by Sunday, could accomplish
the merger only with government assistance. For a variety of reasons, the Board
believed that it was appropriate to implement the systemic risk exception to give the
FDIC the widest flexibility to resolve Wachovia in order to maintain confidence in the
banking system. Among the reasons was the concern about liquidity pressures that
would be felt by similarly situated banking institutions if there was a disorderly or very
focused failure of Wachovia. Also, there was concern that, because Wachovia looked so
strong on a capital basis and it would be somewhat surprising to some in the market
when it closed, it would send a bad signal about similarly situated institutions. There
was also concern about the large amount of foreign deposits that would be left behind in
a least-cost resolution; the potential for money market mutual funds, which are already
in a fragile state, to have further disruption from a least-cost resolution; and that the
current financial turmoil and weakened economy would be further weakened if the leastcost solution was pursued and that might undermine business and household confidence.
The FDIC and the Treasury both agreed with that analysis, and the Secretary
consulted with the President, and the systemic risk exception was invoked on Sunday
late afternoon. After a bidding process that was run by the FDIC between Citi and
Wells Fargo, Citi emerged as the better bid for Wachovia. You may have seen this
morning a report about that bid. Citi offered slightly more than $2 billion to the existing
shareholders. Plus it would buy out all of the banks from underneath Wachovia and
leave A.G. Edwards and Evergreen, the two investment banking firms of Wachovia,
with the existing shareholders. Citi identified a portfolio of largely real estate–related
assets that was about $312 billion in size that it felt it could not handle without some
loss-sharing with the FDIC. It proposed to the FDIC that Citi would take a $54 billion
first loss position, and then it asked the FDIC to share losses—actually to take losses on
the portfolio—above the $54 billion mark. The FDIC’s analysis of that was that the
$54 billion cushion was sufficient to allow the FDIC on its average basis to emerge with
little or no loss, and so the FDIC accepted that bid.
The Board was asked to give some capital relief to Citi in connection with this and
did agree to give relief at the holding company level from the tier 1 regulatory ratio and
the leverage ratio for approximately $270 billion worth of assets that would come over
from Wachovia to Citi. That capital relief will be amortized over time and is similar in
many ways to the relief that was granted in the Bear Stearns transaction. An application
will be filed shortly for the merger. The two parties are still working out the details of
the merger agreement, but they expect to have it done in the next day or so. That’s all.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there questions for Scott? President Lacker, would you
like to add anything?

September 29, 2008

12 of 16

MR. LACKER. Yes. Wachovia was losing about $1 billion in deposits a day on average
over the past couple of weeks. They have liquidity to last under a calm scenario this week only until
maybe Thursday or Friday. They probably would have needed discount window borrowing in the
middle of the week; but given the news, they were affected by the WaMu closure because of what
that did to senior debt holders, and they began experiencing companies pulling away from them in
the middle of the day on Friday. So they were sort of caught up in the wake after WaMu. They
didn’t think they could survive without a lot of support today. So they were very committed to
doing something over the weekend. They have $64 billion plus in collateral, lendable value pledged
at the discount window. They have $12.5 billion outstanding at the TAF, some of that 28-day, some
of that in the two 84-day auctions, and we will leave them on primary credit, and they’ll retain that
TAF credit. We intend issuing an announcement later this morning that says something like, “In
support of this transition, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond stands ready to provide liquidity
as needed.”
So they have $52 billion in lendable value net of the TAF money. They have $150 billion in
uninsured deposits, and as for other numbers, the market cap at the end of the day Friday was a little
over $21 billion. Evergreen Investments, Wachovia Securities, and A.G. Edwards have a value of
about $12 billion. This leaves shareholders of the holding company with about $14 billion in value.
Wachovia was trading at about $1 this morning after trading at about $10 per share last Friday. I’m
not sure people understand the Edwards and Evergreen part, but we’re monitoring the situation very
closely and have people on their desk right now.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. We’ll take questions for either Scott or
Jeff. President Plosser, I think you were first.

September 29, 2008

13 of 16

MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have a question about the $300 billion of
mortgage assets referred to that were segregated out, and the FDIC said that Citi will take the first
$54 billion. Does anybody know whether that is current market value? What is the $300 billion?
Is it market price, or was it face value? How was that valued—do we know?
MR. ALVAREZ. The $312 billion was the value on the books of Wachovia, and so Citi is
providing the cushion in several ways. One is marking them down $30 billion to begin with, to be
more in line with what Citi’s own marks are and to add to reserves to supplement the potential
losses there. Then the rest is a loss-sharing.
MR. PLOSSER. Does the first $30 billion markdown come out of the $54 billion?
MR. ALVAREZ. Yes.
MR. PLOSSER. So they have already taken roughly $30 billion of the $54 billion losses
they’ve promised they’d take?
MR. ALVAREZ. That’s correct.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, this may be a conversation for another day, but it seems to
me that we’re ending up with more and more concentration—Bank of America, Citicorp, Morgan—
and I’m curious as to what we plan longer term so as not to displace the ability of other institutions
to play their role in the financial markets and grow their businesses—the super-regionals that are
healthy and so on. But I guess just philosophically what concerns me longer term is that, in
response to these actions, there are no other people to take these steps, but we’re creating larger and
larger concentrations and bigger and bigger situations where we have too big to fail. I’d just like at
some point to have a conversation on that matter. I’m not objecting to the move taken, obviously,

September 29, 2008

14 of 16

but it is going to present a bigger problem as we go down the path because we’re getting increasing
concentration in fewer and fewer institutions. Just a comment. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Well, let me just add that I share your concern. There is an
increasing concentration. On the other hand, you could also view it as part of a process of
consolidation as well, as we have reduced the number of independent investment banks, for
example. But I agree with that. We have been very constrained throughout this entire crisis, as you
know, by the existing facilities for dealing with failing institutions and mergers being one of the
only tools we have. Going forward, I think there is some hope in the near term under the new
TARP, which would allow resolutions using capital injections basically without necessarily doing a
merger. Then subsequently, I think it’s very important, as we look toward restructuring our
financial regulatory system, to develop good resolution mechanisms and to think about the issues of
concentration and too big to fail. So I take your point, basically.
MR. FISHER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Any other questions for Scott or for Jeff? All right. If not, let
me turn to our last item on the agenda, which is interest on reserves. The TARP legislation provides
for that, and Brian will talk a bit about how we might use that.
MR. MADIGAN. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. As the Chairman indicated, the TARP
legislation includes a provision that accelerates the effective date of the authority to pay
interest on reserves from October 1, 2011, to October 1, 2008. The Federal Reserve
staff believes that we’re ready to start paying interest on reserve balances beginning with
the reserve maintenance period that starts on October 9. Assuming that the legislation is
passed by the Congress and signed by the President later this week, we plan to
recommend shortly thereafter to the Board that the Board direct the Reserve Banks to
begin paying interest on reserves on October 9. Specifically, we plan to suggest that
required reserve balances be remunerated at a rate of the target federal funds rate less
10 basis points, and more significantly in current circumstances, that excess reserve
balances be remunerated initially at a rate of the target federal funds rate less 50 basis
points. We anticipate that the spread between the excess reserves rate and the target
federal funds rate may well need to be adjusted over time, but we’re suggesting a
50 basis point spread initially. We’re proposing no other significant changes to the

September 29, 2008

15 of 16

reserve maintenance framework at this time, although we’ll be recommending a few
relatively technical changes that are motivated by the ability to pay interest on reserves.
In more normal circumstances, we’d think of the system that we’re recommending at
this time as being a type of a corridor system but with required reserves. The primary
credit rate should set the ceiling for the federal funds rate; the excess reserves rate
should set the floor.
In the current circumstances, though, it may turn out that the system will operate
more like what we have been calling a floor system in which the gap between the target
federal funds rate and the excess reserves rate is narrow. This is because, as was
discussed earlier, our tools to absorb reserves provided by, again, various lending
operations could be constrained given the limited remaining capacity to sell securities
and possibly reluctance on the part of Treasury to expand further the supplementary
financing program. In any case, the interest rate on excess reserves should put a floor—
possibly a soft floor, but a floor—under the funds rate and thereby allow the Federal
Reserve to conduct monetary policy appropriately while providing liquidity consistent
with financial stability. I would note that the overall reserve maintenance framework
will remain very complex, possibly overly complex. The staff plans to continue the
study that we presented to the Reserve Bank presidents and the Board members earlier
this year, and at some point, we expect to bring significant further changes to the
policymakers for consideration. But for now, we think that the changes that we’re
proposing will make effective use of the authority that we expect we’ll have beginning
on October 1. Thanks, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thanks, Brian. Are there questions for Brian? President
Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Yes, Brian. So at 50 basis points under the target rate for excess, it sounds
as though your philosophy here is just to limit the tails of the intraday funds rate distribution rather
than to attract a lot of funds and replace the Treasury program. Is that accurate? I mean, how do
you intend to approach that question?
MR. MADIGAN. President Lacker, I think we’re going to need to proceed somewhat
adaptively. We’ll be going from one type of system, in which there has been no remuneration on
excess reserves, to one with a rate that’s fairly close to—50 basis points under—the federal funds
rate. My guess is that it could attract a substantial increase in banks’ interest in holding excess
reserves, especially under current circumstances, when there’s a lot of concern about counterparty

September 29, 2008

16 of 16

credit risk. It may well be the case, as I mentioned, that we’ll be proposing a further narrowing of
the excess reserves rate as we get experience, and we may, indeed, have to do that if our ability to
drain reserves is otherwise constrained. We may need to use the excess reserves rate as the way to
effectively set the federal funds rate. But I think we’ll need to see how it goes and get some
experience.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for Brian? Jeff, did you have another
question? No. Okay. Any other comments or issues? If not, thank you very much, again, for the
short notice, and we’ll obviously keep you well briefed, and we hope you’ll do the same for us.
Good morning.
END OF MEETING

