August 5, 2008

1 of 145

Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on
August 5, 2008
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in the offices of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System in Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, August 5, 2008, at
8:30 a.m. Those present were the following:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Ms. Duke
Mr. Fisher
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner
Mr. Mishkin
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Plosser
Mr. Stern
Mr. Warsh
Messrs. Evans, Lacker, and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee
Messrs. Bullard, Hoenig, and Rosengren, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks of St.
Louis, Kansas City, and Boston, respectively
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Ashton, Assistant General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Messrs. Connors, English, Kamin, Sniderman, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account
Ms. Bailey, Deputy Director, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Governors
Mr. Blanchard, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Struckmeyer, Deputy Staff Director, Office of Staff Director for Management, Board
of Governors

August 5, 2008

2 of 145

Ms. Liang, Messrs. Reifschneider and Wascher, Associate Directors, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Levin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Section Chief, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Wei, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Specialist, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Connolly, First Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
Messrs. Fuhrer and Judd, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
and San Francisco, respectively
Messrs. Altig, Hakkio, Rasche, and Sullivan, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, St. Louis, and Chicago, respectively
Messrs. Danzig and Duca, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of New York and
Dallas, respectively
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Mr. Hetzel, Senior Economist, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
Mr. Sill, Economic Advisor, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Mr. Del Negro, Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of New York

August 5, 2008

3 of 145

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
August 5, 2008
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good morning, everybody. Today is the last meeting for
our colleague, Governor Mishkin. Rick has attended 16 FOMC meetings as a Committee
member and 23 additional meetings, I assume mostly as the research director for New York. We
are certainly going to miss your singular interventions—[laughter] as well as your insights and
your collegiality. There will be a lunch today in honor of Rick, and we will have a chance then
to express our appreciation for your time here and for your contributions.
There are comings and goings. Today is also the first meeting for Governor Duke, whom
I was pleased to swear in about 15 minutes ago in my office. [Laughter] It took an
unconscionably long time for this qualified person to be confirmed by the U.S. Senate. We are
very glad that she had the patience to stick it out and that she is finally here. She brings a great
deal to the table, including a lot of experience in banking, which obviously is something of great
interest to us these days. So, welcome. We look forward to a long and productive association.
Turning to Desk operations, before Bill begins, a couple of issues were raised in our last
videoconference. One had to do with the concern about whether we have a sufficient balance
sheet to address liquidity needs going forward. Bill, I believe you are going to talk a bit about
that—give an interim report on where we are on balance sheet issues and what we might do in
case those constraints start to bind. The second concern that was raised had to do with what we
mean by “unusual and exigent” and how we determine whether those conditions are still
prevailing. I have asked Brian and the staff to put together a memo giving us some thoughts on
that issue, and that will come to you before the next meeting and give us a chance to think about
it and, as time permits, discuss it at the next meeting. Without further ado, Bill.

August 5, 2008

4 of 145

MR. DUDLEY. 1 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to be referring to the
handout in front of you. It seems to be getting thicker at every meeting. Since the
June FOMC meeting, financial markets have been characterized by two distinct
phases. Until the middle of July, share prices weakened substantially, and credit
spreads widened. The financial sector’s difficulties were at the forefront as housingprice declines continued to pressure this sector. The IndyMac failure led to uninsured
depositors taking losses, and this roiled the regional banking sector. The equity
prices of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac plummeted, and their ongoing viability was
called into question. The passage of housing legislation that provided support to the
GSEs then led to an improvement in investor sentiment and a modest recovery in
share prices. As shown in exhibit 1, financial sector shares led the recovery.
However, the overall improvement in the broad market indexes was very modest,
both in the United States and abroad (exhibit 2). Moreover, no meaningful
improvement was evident in the corporate debt or CDS markets. CDS spreads have
not changed much, and spreads of asset-backed securities have begun to widen again
(exhibits 3 and 4).
Despite intermeeting news that I would characterize on balance as more bad than
good, this news did not trigger the type of risk-reduction spasms by investors that
have sporadically plagued financial markets over the past year. Exhibits 5 and 6
compare the correlation of daily asset price changes across a broad array of asset
classes in July to the corresponding period in March. The blue boxes denote
correlations with absolute values of more than 0.5. As can be seen, asset price
movements have become much less correlated.
Although the mood is slightly improved today compared with a few weeks ago,
the underlying news, especially from the financial sector, remains quite bleak in most
respects. In particular, there is little conviction that financial shares have reached a
bottom. This can be seen in the unusually high volatility of financial share prices
(exhibit 7) and the positive skew in options prices for financial firms, in which the
price of a put has been much higher than an equivalent out-of-the money call (exhibit
8). Financial market participants are paying more to protect the downside than to
participate on the upside.
Merrill Lynch’s recent experience is reflective of the challenging environment
faced by financial firms. Merrill Lynch raised new equity capital and announced that
it had sharply reduced its net ABS CDO exposure. Investors were initially pleased
that the company had bitten the bullet, and the share price rallied in response. But
further consideration tempered the initial enthusiasm—and there are more articles on
this in the Wall Street Journal today. A closer look revealed some troubling aspects
of the transactions. First, Merrill Lynch took an additional $4.4 billion of CDO writedowns from the June quarter-end valuation date. Merrill Lynch sold CDO exposures
with a par value of $30.6 billion to Lone Star for $6.7 billion. At quarter-end, these
positions had been carried on the books for $11.1 billion. Second, this transaction
resulted in a drop in net CDO exposure of only $1.7 billion because Merrill Lynch
1

The materials used by Mr. Dudley are appended to this transcript (appendix 1).

August 5, 2008

5 of 145

provided 75 percent nonrecourse financing to Lone Star. Merrill Lynch gave away all
the upside on these assets in exchange for a payment equal to 6 percent of their par
value. Third, Merrill Lynch’s equity issuance reportedly resulted in 38 percent
dilution to existing shareholders. The dilution was exacerbated by the terms of an
earlier share issuance agreement with Temasek, a Singapore sovereign wealth fund.
This agreement granted Temasek a “make whole” provision if, within 12 months,
common stock was issued at a price below Temasek’s $48 per share investment. This
resulted in Merrill Lynch’s paying $2.5 billion to Temasek, which Temasek then
rolled into a new $3.4 billion share investment.
Over the past month, the troubles of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have taken
center stage. Rising loan delinquencies for prime single-family mortgages caused
share prices to plunge. This eroded confidence that the firms would be able to raise
new equity capital and raised concerns about the viability of these firms. This, in
turn, intensified the downward pressure on share prices. As a result, investors began
to lose their enthusiasm for the firms’ debt. Investors in short-term discount notes
were uninterested in taking on any potential credit risk. As a result, issuance volumes
fell, and discount note rates climbed (exhibits 9 and 10). Some investors in the firms’
longer-term debt obligations—including some major foreign central banks—became
unwilling to add to their long-term agency debt and agency MBS positions, and one
or two of the central banks actually cut their positions somewhat. However, longerterm debt spreads did not change much because the loss of central bank demand was
offset by buying from U.S. fixed-income asset managers, who believed that the
implicit Treasury support of GSE debt was likely to be hardened (exhibit 11). Fannie
and Freddie responded by issuing less debt. To husband their liquidity, the two firms
have backed away from purchasing agency mortgage-backed securities for their own
portfolios. The removal of this bid was one factor that caused the mortgage basis—
the spreads between the option-adjusted yield on agency MBS and other benchmark
yields, such as Treasuries and interest rate swaps—to widen significantly (exhibit 12).
The Congress responded by enacting housing legislation that included provisions
that hardened the implicit government guarantee and, thus, reduced debt rollover risk.
The Treasury now has authority to lend the GSEs an unlimited amount of funds, the
magnitude being constrained only by the debt-limit ceiling. In response, discount
note issuance costs have fallen in the most recent auctions. However, enactment of
the legislation has not generated any comparable narrowing in the mortgage basis or
resolved the longer-term outlook for the GSEs. The mortgage basis remains wide in
part because Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have few incentives to expand their
balance sheets. Although their regulatory capital is still well above minimum levels,
these capital standards are under review. Moreover, because further losses are likely
in coming quarters, it is unclear how long this excess capital will be available to
support portfolio growth. Of course, the two firms could respond by issuing new
equity. However, the low level of these companies’ share prices makes this option
unattractive. To raise sufficient funds to ensure long-term viability would cause
massive dilution for existing shareholders. To put this in perspective, the current
market capitalization of Freddie Mac is only about $5 billion. This compares with a

August 5, 2008

6 of 145

book of business in terms of its portfolio and guaranteed book of $2.2 trillion.
Because the GSEs will likely remain reluctant to expand their balance sheets in the
near term, the mortgage basis will probably remain elevated, keeping mortgage rates
high. This will intensify the downward pressure on housing activity and prices,
which in turn will lead to greater loan delinquencies and losses. The consequence
will likely put further pressure on Fannie’s and Freddie’s capital positions. So what’s
the bottom line? In my view, the legislation has helped to avert—at least for now—a
meltdown in the agency debt and agency MBS markets. But the passage is no
panacea for ensuring the viability of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac or in enabling the
two firms to provide significant support to the U.S. housing market.
One consequence of the GSE-related turbulence was a temporary pickup in
demand in the most recent schedule 1 TSLF auction, on July 25 (exhibit 13). As term
mortgage agency repo spreads widened relative to term Treasury repo rates, the cost
of borrowing via the TSLF became more attractive. This illustrates how the TSLF
program can act as a shock absorber and reduce volatility in term repo rates. With the
exception of the July 25 auction, the TSLF auctions continue to be undersubscribed
with relatively stable bid-to-cover ratios.
In contrast to the turbulence evident in the financial sector, the bank term funding
markets have been relatively stable since the June FOMC meeting. As shown in
exhibits 14 and 15, the spreads of one-month LIBOR and three-month LIBOR to OIS
remain elevated in the United States, Europe, and the United Kingdom. However,
this masks the fact that forward funding rates appear to have risen significantly. As
shown in exhibit 16, the forward three-month LIBOR–OIS spread has risen about
20 basis points over the past three months. This spread is now anticipated to remain
elevated at around 50 basis points on a one-to-two-year time horizon, indicating that
market participants expect term funding pressures to persist for the foreseeable future.
Before the crisis, the spread was about 10 basis points.
The U.S. TAF auctions also show a stable trend. As shown in exhibit 17, the bidto-cover ratio remains around 1.2 to 1, and the stop-out rate has been quite steady
over the past five auctions. In contrast, as shown in exhibit 18, the bid-to-cover ratio
for the ECB dollar auction continues to climb. As I noted in an earlier briefing, part
of this rise reflects the fact that the ECB auction is noncompetitive. The bids are
prorated, and the banks pay the U.S stop-out rate. Larger bids by European banks in
the ECB auction do not affect the interest rate they pay for such funding, and that
encourages more-aggressive bidding. Conversations with the ECB staff indicate that
they are concerned that the outcome could be a bidding spiral. Individual banks
could keep raising the size of their bid submissions to ensure a stable amount of
dollar funding. It is possible that these pressures could eventually encourage the ECB
to switch to a Swiss National Bank type of multiple-price auction. This would
eliminate the incentives to bid more and more aggressively on the part of the
European banks. However, such a change probably would result in a higher stop-out
rate in the ECB auctions compared with the United States or Switzerland. ECB
officials might not be fully comfortable with such an outcome.

August 5, 2008

7 of 145

Early reactions by primary dealers and depository institutions to the two
refinements to our liquidity facilities—the $50 billion program of options on the
TSLF and the introduction of the longer, 84-day, maturity TAF auctions—have been
favorable. We recently—last Friday and this Monday—completed an extensive set of
interviews with the primary dealer community about the TSLF options program and
will be proposing final terms, within the set of parameters approved by the FOMC on
July 24, by the end of this week. Of course, we will keep you fully apprised as we go
forward on this.
As you know, our liquidity facilities have placed significant demands on the
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet, as the Chairman mentioned. As the liquidity
facilities have been expanded, we have reduced the size of our Treasury portfolio.
We do this to drain the reserves added by our liquidity programs. The use of our
balance sheet to sterilize these reserve additions has raised questions about whether
sufficient capacity is still available to meet prospective demand—especially a large
unanticipated rise in PDCF or PCF borrowing. Exhibit 19 illustrates the
transformation of the Federal Reserve System’s balance sheet over the past year, out
of Treasuries into non-Treasury lending. As shown in exhibit 20, the non-Treasury
portion consists mainly of $150 billion of TAF loans, the $62 billion (in steady state)
of foreign exchange swaps executed with the ECB and the SNB, and our $80 billion
28-day maturity, single-tranche repo program. Although the amount of Treasuries
held in the SOMA portfolio still totals $479 billion, a majority of these securities are
encumbered in one way or another. As shown in exhibit 21, from that $479 billion
we need to allocate $45 billion of Treasuries to collateralize the foreign central bank
repo pool, retain $35 billion of on-the-run Treasury securities to keep available for
our traditional Treasury securities lending program, and set aside $175 billion for the
TSLF program and now an additional $50 billion for the TSLF options program
(TOP). When the options program is included, we have about $174 billion of
unencumbered Treasuries available to offset additional PCF and PDCF borrowing or
to fund further expansion of our liquidity programs. Obviously, further expansion of
our TAF or TSLF auctions or single-tranche repo operations would be at our
discretion and, thus, does not pose a meaningful problem in terms of reserve
management. We wouldn’t expand these programs if we didn’t have the ability to
conduct offsetting reserve draining operations. However, what would we do if faced
with a huge rise in PCF or PDCF borrowing? An inability to drain the reserves added
by such lending would cause the federal funds rate to collapse below the target.
Fortunately, we have a number of alternatives that would enable us to offset very
large demands for PCF or PDCF borrowing. First, we could sell our remaining
unencumbered Treasury holdings or use them to engage in reverse repo operations
with the primary dealer community. This could be augmented by the $35 billion of
on-the-run Treasury securities currently set aside for securities lending. Together,
these two sources could be used to drain more than $200 billion of reserves. Second,
we have made arrangements with the Treasury so that, if the need arises, the Treasury
would issue special Treasury bills into the market on our behalf and take the proceeds

August 5, 2008

8 of 145

and deposit them at the Federal Reserve. Putting the proceeds of such T-bill sales on
the Fed’s balance sheet would drain reserves from the banking system. The potential
scope here is large. The housing legislation raised the debt limit substantially. There
is now about $1.2 trillion of headroom under the debt limit compared with only about
$400 billion previously. Third, we continue to press for legislation that would
accelerate the timing of the Federal Reserve’s authority to pay interest on reserves.
Being able to pay interest on reserves would put a floor under the federal funds rate.
In this case, an inability to drain additional reserves from the banking system would
not result in the federal funds rate collapsing toward zero. Finally, we continue to
explore the legal and operational feasibility of expanding our balance sheet in other
ways. For example, could we engage in reverse repurchase transactions using the
collateral obtained from our single-tranche repo and from our TSLF operations?
I wouldn’t say I am confident that we can handle any eventuality—after all, the
triparty repo system provides trillions of dollars of funding to the primary dealers. In
the unlikely event that it all came to us, we wouldn’t have the capacity to fully offset
it at present. But we could accommodate hundreds of billions of dollars of demand if
that proved to be necessary. That said, I want to go on record that any very large
unanticipated demand for funding from the Federal Reserve by dealers or depository
institutions might take a few days or more to offset by reserve-draining operations.
Thus, in such a circumstance, the federal funds rate could temporarily trade below its
target.
Turning now to interest rate expectations, monetary policy expectations have
reverted back to the very slow path toward tightening that was evident before the
April FOMC meeting. As shown in exhibits 22 and 23, the federal funds rate and
Eurodollar futures curves have shifted down sharply since the June FOMC meeting.
Our current survey of the primary dealers shows an even slower anticipated pace of
tightening. As shown in exhibit 24, the average of the dealer forecasts in our most
recent survey anticipates no tightening until the second quarter of 2009. But the
change in the dealers’ forecasts since the June FOMC meeting is more modest than
the shift in market expectations (compare exhibits 24 and 25). Looking at the
probabilities of different rate outcomes implied by options on federal funds rate
futures in exhibits 26 and 27, one sees that there has been a steady trend upward in
the probability that the FOMC will keep its policy target rate unchanged at both the
August and the September FOMC meetings. Note also that the probability assigned
by market participants to further easing is lower than the probability assigned to
tightening.
The past month has been marked by a significant decline in commodity prices.
As shown in exhibit 28, although the energy complex has led the way down,
agriculture and industrial metals prices have also declined significantly. These
declines have spurred a large decline in breakeven rates of inflation measured by the
spread of nominal Treasury and TIPS yields (exhibit 29). As shown in exhibit 30,
longer-term market-based indicators of inflation expectations have increased a bit.
Both the Barclays’ and the Board staff’s measures of five-year, five-year-forward

August 5, 2008

9 of 145

inflation implied by nominal Treasury versus TIPS yields have drifted upward since
the June FOMC meeting. However, both measures remain well below the peaks
reached in early March.
There were no foreign operations during this period. I request a vote to ratify the
operations conducted by the System Open Market Account since the June FOMC
meeting. As always, I am very happy to take any questions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much, Bill. Any questions for Bill?
President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Bill, at our recent intermeeting call, I wasn’t
expecting the characterization of the financial stresses to sort of backtrack to the point that it
feels like March. Maybe somebody said it was as scary as March. I have noticed in a lot of our
speeches that many have noted that financial conditions have not returned to normal, and I have
always kind of wondered what “normal” would be. With hundreds of billions of dollars of losses
at major financial institutions, I guess I am wondering whether we can reasonably expect that
this distress and adjustment will be alleviated over some reasonably short period of time. We are
12 months in. Isn’t this likely to take 12 more months or longer? Financial institutions have a
lot to digest. What do you think financial institutions and markets have to do to signal a return to
acceptable functionality? What are we looking for, and what changes in fundamentals are likely
to occur that would deliver sustainable liquidity improvements?
MR. DUDLEY. Okay. That is a big question. [Laughter]
MR. EVANS. I think this is a good time to revisit our strategy and what we are thinking
about accomplishing here. It is my understanding that the Chairman has asked you to look at
unusual and exigent circumstances.
MR. DUDLEY. I think the first thing we can say is that market participants expect this
to last a long time. The fact that the forward LIBOR–OIS spreads are elevated, looking out a

August 5, 2008

10 of 145

year or two years, suggests that the market views the balance sheet adjustment process as taking
quite a long time. Second, I would say that how long is really going to depend in part on how
the macroeconomy evolves. If the macroeconomy evolves in a favorable way, then the losses
that will be borne by the financial sector will be discretely smaller, and so you can get through
this process sooner. In contrast, if the economy has a bad macroeconomic outcome, then
obviously this is going to be a lot worse. We don’t really know the answer to that yet. Part of
that is also going to be very sensitive to what happens in terms of individual institutions over the
next 6 to 12 months because we are putting a tremendous amount of strain on the financial
sector. If there is little breakage, then the chance of our getting through relatively quickly, say in
12 months, is pretty high. But if that stress creates failures and systemic contagion because of
those failures, then this could last quite a long time. So the answer is that we don’t really know
yet. I think there is a long way to go. We are about one year in, by my measure. I date this back
to August 9, when the ECB did their massive reserve intervention. So I wouldn’t want to make a
bet on what inning this is, but it is definitely not the ninth inning.
MR. FISHER. Please, no baseball analogies. [Laughter]
MR. EVANS. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to follow up on that a little because it
seems to me that, over a year ago now, there was a lot of discussion by various parties that had to
do with risk premiums being very low. People were worried that the economy and the financial
markets were underpricing risk. Now, all of a sudden, these spreads have increased. If you look
at the OIS spread that you referred to, the one-to-two years out, is there a possibility that this is
permanent—that in some sense the level of spreads in the pricing of the risk is just now higher

August 5, 2008

11 of 145

and it is going to stay higher, maybe not as high as the peak but at some higher level? If that is
true, then using those spreads as a measure of how distressed the market is could be very
misleading. As a consequence, it would seem as though you would want to be asking questions
not just about the prices and the spreads but also about volumes in these markets. Maybe, Bill,
you can elaborate on what volumes are doing—certainly in the near-term, the overnight, and the
one-month interbank funding markets? Are volumes back to their levels even though the spreads
are higher? I think we have to be a little careful that, if this really is a permanent shift in risk
premiums, looking at these things may be the wrong metric for assessing what is going on. If
you have any observations about that, I would like to hear them.
MR. DUDLEY. I think it is a fair point that we shouldn’t assume that “normal” is
returning to the LIBOR–OIS spreads that applied before August 2007, so we have to look at a
broader set of indicators. For example, I think that it would be worthwhile looking at the spread
between jumbo mortgage rates and conforming mortgage rates as evidence of the degree of the
shadow price of balance sheet capacity. I think that, once financial institutions either raise
sufficient capital or stop taking loan-loss provisions or writing down assets so that they have
enough capacity to expand their balance sheets, we will be getting to the end of this process.
Another thing I would say to add to the answer I gave earlier to President Evans is that
the trajectory of housing in all of this is going to be hugely important. One thing that may signal
the next phase, maybe the beginning of the end, is when people really do get a sign that the
housing sector is starting to bottom, probably first in activity and then in price. Once that
happens, the huge risk premium embedded in some of these mortgage-related assets will then
collapse. That means that the mark-to-market losses in a lot of institutions will start to fall. So I
think that is going to be a very, very important metric once housing starts to really bottom and

August 5, 2008

12 of 145

people get some visibility about how much home prices will go down. You know, when the
argument is about whether home prices are going to go down 15 percent or 20 percent, that will
be a very different argument from the argument now, which is whether home prices are going to
go down 15 percent or 30 percent.
MR. PLOSSER. How about volumes?
MR. DUDLEY. I think that the market function has varied, frankly. In the middle of the
GSE turmoil, the agency market was basically shut down. With the passage of the legislation, it
has improved. Haircuts are still quite elevated. Liquidity is certainly not as good as it was back
before this crisis. The cost of funding through the FX swap market is still very elevated relative
to LIBOR. I think things are improving, though, in the sense that shocks are not as broadly
contagious as they were before. The reason is that people now are pretty cognizant of what the
problems are; and so when there are new, bad pieces of information, people aren’t quite as
shocked, and they don’t revise their outlook to the same degree about a whole variety of asset
classes. But I think that is why the correlation slide that I showed you in the exhibits showed
less of a correlation between different asset classes. We are still getting tremendous amounts of
movement in asset prices, but it doesn’t seem as though, if something happens in one sector, it
necessarily ripples through to other sectors.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Bullard.
MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m just following up here. I mean, as
much as I love exhibits 14, 15, and 16—and I have used a lot of them myself when I talk about
the economy—it is not really appropriate to look at these as measures of stress. You could just
say that these are the equilibrium prices in an economy that is adjusting to a big shock. You
could have a completely flat line here that would indicate stress in markets because these prices

August 5, 2008

13 of 145

aren’t moving around appropriately to the risks that have developed and opened up. So a lot of
the concern around the table has been exactly that, when markets freeze up, you can’t do any
trade at any price; and for that the volume data would seem to be a much better indicator of the
kinds of things that we are worried about. I think that this is conditioning a lot of our thinking
about the economy—you look at this picture, and you naturally think it has to go back to 10 basis
points before the crisis is over. That probably is not going to happen anytime soon and maybe
never. Thanks.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I thought that part of President Evans’s question was whether markets
are back to normal for a period in which they are adjusting to hundreds of billions of dollars of
losses on mortgage loans. So I would be interested in your characterization of how markets are
working relative to how well they ought to work in that circumstance.
MR. DUDLEY. I guess we don’t have a lot of observations to know what normal is in
that environment. I think that the markets are generally doing somewhat better, as I said, relative
to the flow of new information. I don’t think the information flow has improved, but I think the
markets are responding a little better to the bad information. That is how I would characterize it.
MR. LACKER. If I could follow up, the reactions you described sound warranted by the
information coming in. The market is digesting information about the location and magnitude of
losses and the extent to which housing is going to recover.
MR. DUDLEY. I think the market is reacting pretty appropriately to the information it is
seeing, although I would say that the risk premiums are still high in a pretty broad array of assets
relative to what one would think would be normal. Haircuts are high, and market liquidity is still

August 5, 2008

14 of 145

impaired. We are definitely not back to normal market function in a pretty broad array of asset
classes.
MR. LACKER. But when you use “normal” in that sentence, you mean a time period
without hundreds of millions of dollars of losses that we don’t know quite the magnitude of,
right?
MR. DUDLEY. Yes. It is hard to benchmark how markets are supposed to behave in a
period with hundreds of billions of dollars of losses—because how many times have we actually
gone through this experience?
MR. LACKER. So if I could just follow up—in these graphs, what would you point to as
the effects of our actions or our lending?
MR. DUDLEY. The effects of our actions have been to mitigate the rise in term funding
pressures and to somewhat mitigate the forced liquidation of collateral because of the inability to
obtain funding. Because of that, our actions have helped prevent the kind of pernicious margin
spiral that we saw in March, when volatility was going up and haircuts were going up, which
was then causing mark-to-market losses, which were causing forced selling. So I think our
actions have mitigated those to some degree. Now, obviously, we don’t know what the
counterfactual would have been in the absence of our actions, but I believe—and most market
participants believe—that our actions have been helpful in those respects.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I guess I would comment that there is an
asymmetry here, which is the possibility of systemic risk. There are situations in which
failures—major collapses of certain markets—can have discontinuous and large effects on the
economy. We have seen that in many contexts across a large number of countries. These
stresses do reflect the working out of equilibriums given fundamental losses, which we can’t do

August 5, 2008

15 of 145

very much or anything about. But they do create machinery that is less flexible and less able to
respond to new shocks, and that raises systemic risk. That is the risk that we want to try to
minimize, even as we allow the markets to work their way through and to price the changes we
have seen.
MR. DUDLEY. We have never argued that the role of our facilities is to prevent the
adjustment. We have always argued that the role of the facilities is to allow the adjustment to be
orderly rather than disorderly. That is what we have been going for.
MR. LACKER. I would be interested in seeing a model, Mr. Chairman. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Certainly. Any other questions for Bill? If not, let me turn
to David Wilcox for the economic situation.
MR. WILCOX. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In putting together the economic
outlook for the current Greenbook, we confronted three main changes in
circumstances relative to the situation as it stood in June. First, the labor market
looked distinctly weaker than we had anticipated. In the employment report that was
released in early July, payroll employment declined by more in June than we had
been expecting, and the unemployment rate held at 5½ percent rather than dropping
back as we had anticipated, following the increase of 0.5 percentage point in the
previous month. The fraction of the labor force working part time for economic
reasons had moved up sharply, and claims for unemployment insurance were trending
up. The second major change in circumstance that we confronted was a secondquarter increase in real GDP that apparently continued to outpace our expectations.
In last Wednesday’s Greenbook, we projected growth at an annual rate of 2.7 percent
in the second quarter, 1 percentage point stronger than in the June Greenbook. At
that pace, GDP growth would have slightly exceeded our estimate of the rate of
growth of potential output. The third major change was a financial sector that looked
more hostile to economic activity, on balance, than at the time of the last meeting
despite the improvement during the second half of the intermeeting period that Bill
Dudley has just described. When we put the Greenbook to bed, the stock market was
about 7 percent lower than we had expected as of June, a variety of spreads remained
wide or had widened further since the previous Greenbook, and concerns had been
heightened about some key institutions. In addition, the latest reading from the
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey pointed to a remarkably widespread continued
tightening of terms and standards for both households and businesses.
These three factors—a weaker labor market, apparently stronger aggregate
demand, and a more hostile financial environment—did not easily fit together. To

August 5, 2008

16 of 145

resolve the situation, we began by ruling in favor of the profile presented by the labor
market and heavily discounting the greater vigor being signaled by the spending
indicators. In our judgment, the story being told by the labor market seemed by far
the more credible one, what with housing prices continuing to decline at a rapid pace,
consumer sentiment dropping into sub-basement levels, energy prices remaining high
even after their recent partial reversal, loan officers reporting a pervasive tightening
of credit terms and standards, and other measures of financial stress flashing at least
amber. Moreover, while quarter-to-quarter discrepancies between GDP and IP are
commonplace, the nearly 4 percent drop in manufacturing IP during the second
quarter fueled our skepticism that the economy was on a fundamentally sound
footing.
As you know, for several Greenbooks our GDP projection has been substantially
weaker than it would have been if we had kept in line with the advice from our
forecasting models. We were motivated to impose this judgmental weakness partly in
recognition of the possibility that we might be entering a recession, and recessions are
times when spending tends to fall short of the level that would be indicated by the
fundamentals. We also were motivated by the restraint that we think financial
markets are imposing on real activity and which our models are ill-equipped to
capture. In the current projection, we had to modify these assumptions in light of the
changed circumstances. In effect, we interpreted the greater-than-expected strength
of real GDP during the second quarter as reflecting an error of timing with respect to
the judgmental weakness that we had built into the forecast but not a misjudgment
about the overall magnitude of that weakness.
Implementing that interpretation involved three steps. First, we responded to the
unexpected strength in first-half GDP growth by shifting some judgmental weakness
into the second half. Second, we deepened the overall amount of restraint that we
imposed in light of the less favorable financial climate. Third, we stretched out the
period of financial recuperation: Whereas previously we had financial market
conditions essentially returning to normal by the middle of next year, in this
projection we have the period of recuperation extending into 2010. These
adjustments left our projection for real GDP growth 0.1 percentage point lower over
the second half of this year and 0.2 lower next year, despite the offsets from lower oil
prices and a slightly greater dose of fiscal stimulus, reflecting the introduction of
extended unemployment insurance benefits.
For the most part, the avalanche of information that we received since putting out
the Greenbook last Wednesday has corroborated our projection. This year’s revision
of the national income and product accounts threw us no real curve balls. (Sorry for
the baseball analogy.) [Laughter] The growth of real GDP was revised down by an
average of 0.2 percentage point per year. The revisions to the PCE price indexes,
both core and total, were very slight. While the BEA has given us some homework to
do between now and the September meeting in folding these data into our thinking,
any adjustments that we might be prompted to make, including to the supply side of
our forecast, are likely to be slight.

August 5, 2008

17 of 145

On the face of it, the advance estimate of real GDP growth in the second quarter
of this year seemed to hold a bigger surprise. The BEA’s estimate, at 1.9 percent,
came in ¾ percentage point below our estimate in the Greenbook. However, as best
as we can tell—based on still-incomplete information—the miss was attributable to
lower estimates by the BEA of farm inventory investment and of value added in the
trading of used motor vehicles. Our preliminary reading is that neither of these errors
carries any signal for the forward momentum of the economy moving into the second
half of the year. Friday’s employment report was likewise mercifully well behaved—
at least in the narrow sense of conforming to our expectation. Private payroll
employment declined an estimated 76,000 in July; together with small downward
revisions to May and June, that left the level of employment in July very close to our
forecast. In addition, the unemployment rate came in only a few basis points higher
than we had expected.
The only real news since Greenbook publication came from the motor vehicle
manufacturers. On Friday, they reported that sales of light vehicles in July were at an
annual pace of 12.5 million units, much weaker than our already weak forecast of
13.3 million units. Moreover, they knocked their assembly schedules for the third
quarter down from 9.4 million units to 8.9 million units. Taking their schedules on
board would slice another ½ percentage point from our estimate of GDP growth in
the third quarter. The manufacturers have already announced increases in incentives,
but it remains to be seen how vigorously consumers will respond in the current
environment and how great the financial wherewithal of the manufacturers will prove
to be to sustain such moves. In any event, the drop in sales and production is
certainly large enough to give renewed urgency to the question as to whether a
broader retrenchment in spending might be in train.
Turning to the inflation side of the projection, our forecast for core PCE prices
over the remainder of this year is nearly unchanged from the June Greenbook. We
still have core inflation stepping up from a little more than 2 percent during the first
half of this year to a little more than 2½ percent in the second half, as the surge in
prices for imports, energy, and other commodities passes through to retail prices and
as some components that saw unusually low readings earlier in the year accelerate to
a more normal rate of increase. Next year, with the pressures from import, energy,
and commodity prices diminishing and with slack in resource utilization becoming a
little greater, we have core inflation dropping back to 2¼ percent. The projection for
next year is also the same as in the June Greenbook, as the influences from lower
energy prices and slightly greater economic slack are roughly offset by the passthrough of higher import prices.
The more dramatic changes in our inflation outlook came in the noncore pieces.
Not surprisingly, the plunge in oil prices since the June meeting caused us to whack
our forecast for retail energy price inflation over the second half of this year. For
next year, however, we marked up PCE energy price inflation a little, partly because
natural gas futures prices have a more positive tilt than they did before and partly

August 5, 2008

18 of 145

because gasoline margins will still have some recovering to do. At the same time, we
have become more pessimistic about the outlook for food price inflation. The CPI for
food in June came in at 0.8 percent, much higher than our forecast of 0.3 percent.
Because we have mostly been surprised to the upside thus far this year, we decided to
move closer to our food price model, which has been calling for larger increases than
we were previously willing to write down. The net result, as you saw in the
Greenbook, is an outlook with faster food price inflation despite the fact that futures
curves for both livestock and crops have moved down since the last meeting. All
told, we now have headline PCE inflation running at an average annual pace of
3½ percent over the second half of this year, nearly 1 percentage point slower than in
the June Greenbook. For next year, we have marked up total PCE inflation by a few
tenths in light of our reassessment of the food price situation and the slightly greater
rise in energy prices that we now see next year.
With regard to the risks in the outlook, my sense is that the downside risks to
economic activity have increased since the time of the June Greenbook. That view is
informed by two main factors: First, while we have factored the more unsettled
nature of the financial environment into our baseline outlook, the situation seems
more fragile than before, and the implications for real activity of a sharp deterioration
in financial conditions could be quite large. The first alternative scenario that we
presented in the Greenbook—entitled “severe financial stress”—updates our periodic
attempt to assemble an integrated macroeconomic and financial scenario. Second, the
deterioration in the motor vehicles sector now, to my eye, more convincingly takes on
the profile of what we usually see in the course of a typical recession. During the
intermeeting period, we will be on high alert for evidence suggesting that the
weakness in vehicle sales is a harbinger of a broader shortfall in consumer spending.
As for inflation, the upside risks have, in my view, diminished somewhat. Again,
two factors inform this assessment. First, the downtick in the long-term inflation
expectations measured in the Reuters/Michigan survey is somewhat reassuring.
Second, the drop in oil prices is a welcome relief from the steady drumbeat of bad
news from that sector and suggests a somewhat diminished probability that
persistently high topline inflation will be reflected in a more serious erosion of
household expectations, with all the adverse implications for monetary policy that
would entail. To be sure, even with those favorable developments, upside risks
remain. We illustrated one such risk in the scenario entitled “inflationary spiral,” in
which we posited an initial shock to inflation expectations of 50 basis points followed
by an adverse feedback loop that causes actual and expected inflation to chase each
other up nearly 1 percentage point above baseline. Monetary policy eventually brings
the process under control but only over a lengthy period of time, partly because the
rule that we use in the simulations has policy responding to actual but not to expected
inflation. Steve Kamin will now continue our presentation.
MR. KAMIN. For the next couple of weeks, millions of people around the world
will be watching the Olympic games in Beijing. For those of us charged with
forecasting the global economy, of course, China-watching is a year-round task. But

August 5, 2008

19 of 145

notably, the most salient developments since your last meeting have arisen outside of
China. Chief among them, of course, have been the precipitous fluctuations in the
price of oil. When the last FOMC meeting concluded on June 25, the spot price of
WTI crude oil was running at $134 per barrel. It soared to over $145 by mid-July
before plunging to about $119 as of this morning. The $26 per barrel drop over a
three-week period was the largest on record in nominal dollar terms, although in
percent terms, the 18 percent decline we’ve seen has been exceeded on a couple of
occasions in recent years. Notably, many other commodity prices, especially those
for natural gas and many food crops, also declined sharply.
It has been heartening, and a welcome change, to see oil prices undershoot rather
than overshoot our previous forecast. But it would be premature to pop open the
champagne. We’ve seen several other steep declines in oil prices in recent years that
gave way to renewed upward surges, and it remains to be seen whether an important
shift in the supply–demand balance has occurred. Saudi Arabia added a total of
400,000 barrels a day to its production of oil in May and June, and there are
indications that its production rose in July, too. However, these increases bring total
OPEC production up only to their level in early 2006, and the world economy has
grown considerably larger since then. Analysts have cited gloomier forecasts of
global economic growth, and thus global oil demand, as contributing to the weaker oil
prices; but those forecasts have been coming down for the past year with little
apparent effect. Although oil consumption in the industrial economies clearly has
slowed over the past year, we have yet to see either a concerted buildup in U.S. oil
inventories or any indications that oil demand among developing countries is slowing.
Therefore, a further lurch upward in oil prices is a distinct possibility. Moreover,
with spot and futures prices having first soared and then plunged since your last
meeting, the relatively flat path of oil prices that we are projecting is only about
$12 per barrel lower, on balance, than in the previous forecast. In the meantime,
indicators of foreign growth have come in a bit weaker than we expected, and
inflation readings have been on the high side. These gloomier aspects of the
international outlook counterbalance, to some extent, the improved tone of oil and
other commodity markets.
Clearly, prospects appear weakest in the advanced economies. Consistent with
our earlier forecasts of a sharp deceleration in activity, we estimate that growth in all
four of our largest industrial country trading partners—Canada, the euro area, the
United Kingdom, and Japan—came in below 1 percent in the second quarter. In the
United Kingdom, a sharp contraction in the housing sector appears set to drag the
economy into a mild recession in the second half of this year. The remaining major
economies should skirt recession but remain quite weak in the near term amid
slackening export performance, continued stresses in financial markets, tightening
credit standards, and very sharp erosions in business and consumer confidence.
Why are the foreign industrial economies slowing about as much as in the United
States, when the subprime crisis originated in this country and the major drag on the
U.S. economy is the slump in a nontradables sector, housing? Clearly, part of the

August 5, 2008

20 of 145

story involves the international financial linkages that have led foreign markets and
institutions to share in the stresses and losses induced by the U.S. subprime crisis.
Another part of the story involves a common shock—the global boom in oil and food
prices—that has cut into real household income and spending around the globe.
Third, even as the persistent decline in the dollar since 2002 has buoyed U.S. exports
and growth, this has come at the cost of trade performance and economic activity in
our trading partners. Finally, the foreign industrial countries have enjoyed little or
none of the substantial monetary and fiscal stimulus we’ve seen in the United States
over the past year.
We estimate that growth in the emerging market economies also slowed further in
the second quarter, to a pace of roughly 4 percent, where we have it staying for the
remainder of the year. Obviously, this is well above the growth rate of roughly
1 percent that we’ve penciled in for the industrial economies, but it is still below their
likely potential rate as many developing countries struggle with softening export
demand and rising food and energy prices. Notably, however, even after slowing in
the second quarter, estimated Chinese growth powered on at about 10 percent.
By 2009, we see both foreign advanced and emerging market economies
accelerating as financial stresses ease, the U.S. economy picks up, and commodity
prices stop restraining the growth of real household incomes. This recovery scenario
depends crucially on our projection that headline inflation starts moving down within
the next quarter or two, so that substantial monetary tightening is not needed. The
recent decline in oil and other commodities prices provides some comfort that this
scenario will materialize. However, we saw some surprisingly sharp increases in
consumer prices in June, bringing 12-month headline inflation to around 4 percent in
the euro area and the United Kingdom, 5¼ percent in Mexico, and 6 percent in Brazil.
In most of our major trading partners, inflation excluding energy and food prices has
remained better contained; and in China, headline inflation has actually moved down
from its February peak of 8.7 percent, registering 7.1 percent in June. Even so, until
we see several quarters in a row of declines in aggregate measures of inflation, we
will not be out of the woods.
So far, the imprint of slowing foreign growth and rising foreign inflation on the
U.S. external sector has been limited but not negligible. Turning first to prices, core
import price inflation has moved up sharply, from about 3 percent last year to
11 percent in the second quarter; this was the fastest quarterly increase since 1987.
Most of this acceleration was concentrated in material-intensive goods, such as food
and industrial supplies, and was likely due to rising commodity prices rather than to
more-generalized pricing pressures abroad. However, inflation in imported finished
goods also increased this year. As we noted in a special box in the Greenbook, prices
of imports from China have been moving up briskly as a result of increases in
domestic costs and in the value of the renminbi. This step-up in the so-called China
price explains less than one-fifth of the overall acceleration of core import prices but
about one-third of the run-up in inflation for finished goods imports. Even so,

August 5, 2008

21 of 145

assuming commodity prices stabilize going forward, we expect changes in overall
core import prices to slow quite substantially in coming quarters.
So far, U.S. external sector performance has held up well in spite of the slowing
global economy. Net exports added 2¼ percentage points to real GDP growth in the
second quarter, the largest quarterly positive contribution since 1980. Admittedly,
much of this reflected a 6 percent decline in imports, which were dragged down both
by weak U.S. demand and the quirky seasonal pattern in the data on oil imports.
Even so, exports expanded at a very healthy 9½ percent, supported both by the
depreciation of the dollar and by continued robust demand for commodities. Going
forward, we anticipate export growth holding up at a still healthy 7 percent or so, as
foreign economic growth picks up right around the time that the boost from previous
dollar depreciation starts wearing off. The contribution of net exports to U.S. GDP
growth should move down, but this will chiefly reflect a recovery in imports as the
U.S. economy picks up. Thank you. David and I will now be happy to address your
questions.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Questions for our colleagues? President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. David, in terms of the relatively benign outlook for core inflation now and
for headline inflation, I’m wondering what your assumptions are about margin compression and for
the ability of corporations to pass through price increases. By the way, I found the core revisions
somewhat alarming because they’re well above 2 percent, but less alarming than what I think I
heard you say about headline inflation projections. If my memory is correct, over the past two years
there has been a wider spread between core and headline, and part of that has been due to the ability
of firms at least to restrain or not to exploit any perceived pricing power. If you’re assuming that
core will be relatively well behaved over time, some assumptions must be in there about margins
and margin management, and I wonder what they are. Then I have a question for Steve on the
international side to follow up on that.
MR. WILCOX. By our highly imperfect measure of margins, which we see through the
filter of the national income and product accounts, margins at this point are somewhat above the
average over the past 30 years, and we have them coming down for the nonfarm business sector.
We have them coming down a little, but not very much. So we have some slight erosion in

August 5, 2008

22 of 145

margins, but they remain above average. In the corporate sector, which is measured a little
differently from the overall nonfarm business sector, margins are about average at the moment. So I
would not say that a big move in the markup of price over cost is a material driving factor in our
inflation outlook.
MR. FISHER. Obviously the implication of this more dire outlook for economic growth is
that movement of the top line will be very, very difficult, so again, more pressure comes into the
margin side to see that one can satisfy shareholders that things aren’t as bad as they might be.
That’s really the nature of my concern. I don’t know if we’re surveying or getting a sense as to the
pressures that people feel. I’m going to talk about some of that, but you may be doing this more
formally than I’m able to do to get a sense of what kinds of pressures are occurring on margins.
On the international side, Mr. Chairman, if I may—Steve, I’m curious about these Chinese
inflation numbers. As I understand from the Chinese Ministry of Human Resources, the average
wage of urban workers rose 18 percent year over year in the first half of ’08, and yet they report an
official inflation number that I believe you say is 4 or 5 percent of something. How do you square
that corner?
MR. KAMIN. Well, the short answer is that we don’t have enough consistent sources of
data to square it. But you certainly point to a factor that many people have talked about—the
rapidly increasing wages, particularly in those industrial areas on the seaboard that are responsible
for most of the manufacturing. It’s hard to square the relatively limited data that we have on those
wages with movements in overall CPI. But there, too, is a limitation—those CPI numbers that are
cited from China are mainly for urban areas, so it’s hard to know how comparable those are with the
others. As you know, there’s also an extremely large food component in the Chinese CPI. So
because basically food is probably less labor-intensive than the types of manufacturing in which

August 5, 2008

23 of 145

most of the workers are working, that’s part of the way to square that. In some sense, the food
prices aren’t reflecting those high wages as much. Then a final wild card is that there are different
views on what’s happening on both the level of profit margins in China and what they’ve been
doing. A lot of anecdotal reports suggest that profit margins are razor thin and that they are being
squeezed. Other analyses, including some of the World Bank’s, suggest that those profit margins
are still pretty ample. So I think you correctly allude to an important phenomenon—the rising
wages because of high demand for workers—but we’re still busy sorting out the data to figure out
exactly how that maps into prices.
MR. FISHER. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have two questions. First, on the Greenbook
forecast, one thing that struck me is that there was a fairly large revision in your forecast for
nonresidential structures going forward. In fact, after a pretty good showing in the first half of this
year, you marked down the second half of this year for that and marked down substantially 2009. In
the last Greenbook, you had structures actually growing positively in 2009; now it’s minus 4
percent, something like that. Is that driven by something in the model, or is that some adjustment
factor that was added in? If so, what was the rationale for that, or why might it be coming out?
Why do we have that change? Then I’ll follow up with another question.
MR. WILCOX. We don’t quite understand why this sector seems to have resembled the
cartoon character that keeps running along when we think there shouldn’t be any support
underneath it. [Laughter] We are staunchly negative about the second half for this sector, and that
view is informed by the precipitous drop in the architectural billings index. That’s one of the
relatively few indicators that gives us any purchase on what’s going to happen in this sector. It’s a

August 5, 2008

24 of 145

helpful indicator of spending about six months ahead. We think that financial conditions are pretty
tough in this area. We’re getting a lot of anecdotal evidence that people are having greater difficulty
financing projects than was the case before, and we’ve seen some uptick in vacancy rates as well.
So we think all of those are factors. I guess I would say that we’ve heard very persistently negative
reports from our supervision colleagues as well about what’s going on in that area.
MR. PLOSSER. But the change is not just in the second half of this year. You’ve got a big
change for ’09, too.
MR. WILCOX. Yes.
MR. PLOSSER. If we think about the phrase that people use—“financial headwinds”—and
the credit problems that we see, my interpretation of how the staff has modeled that is on the
demand side—of restrained credit limiting demand. But I can also think of the financial sector as
having been hit by a very significant productivity shock, if you will, where the production function
for intermediation has taken a huge productivity shock to it. So in thinking about a model in which
that has happened, you might find yourself thinking about the consequences of that, particularly
how that affects the path of potential output over the near term. If you think that type of shock is
driving potential output down over the near term, depending on the magnitude of that, it is going to
affect your estimates of the gaps and therefore your estimates of inflation and what the economy
looks like going forward. So I guess my second question is, Have you thought much about this, or
is much of this incorporated in the evolution of your output gaps or your potential output measures,
working through that channel? If so, what might be the ramifications for inflation and policy going
forward?

August 5, 2008

25 of 145

MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. I’ll take that because we did have a bit of an internal debate on
that issue awhile back. In particular, Spencer Dale, who was visiting us from the Bank of England,
was basically making exactly the same point you’re making and raising that issue.
MR. PLOSSER. So maybe I’m not so kooky after all. [Laughter]
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. No.
MR. KROSZNER. But we sent him out of the country. [Laughter]
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. One test is whether in previous periods of financial stress like
this, we saw what might be more upward inflation pressure than we otherwise could explain or
productivity performance that we had trouble explaining. After looking at the experience during the
early 1990s in the headwinds period and trying to think about the likely magnitude of the effects of
such a productivity shock coming out of the financial system, we decided that you could see a
negative productivity shock of that sort going on but that its effects are overwhelmed by the fallout
from its effect on demand. So although there might be some negative productivity shock, on net it
turns out to be more of a disinflationary effect. But we also had difficulty seeing it show up in
productivity data. That said, that would be extremely hard for us to find. You know, it could be
there, and we just couldn’t find it.
MR. PLOSSER. So in the way you’ve modeled this in your forecast, are you thinking of
yourselves as modeling that net effect, or do you think of yourselves as modeling and forecasting
just one side? Have you made any effort to incorporate both sides of this potential effect? Even
though it may be small, the question is how small it is.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. We’ve made no explicit adjustment for that in the potential output
assumptions we have going in. Looking back, it was hard to see that there was much, if any, effect,
but that’s a risk knowing that there could be some productivity effect and it’s just hard to find.

August 5, 2008

26 of 145

MR. PLOSSER. Thank you.
MR. WILCOX. May I just augment my earlier answer? I spoke about the nonresidential
building sector. Another factor taking down overall nonresidential spending is that the lower energy
price trajectory reduces our expectation for drilling and mining expenditures, which have also
fallen.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A question for Steve. Could you review
your thought process on core import prices and comment on how sensitive our inflation projections
are to the assumption of, I believe, moderation in core import prices in 2009?
MR. KAMIN. Sure. As I mentioned, core import price inflation shot up very rapidly to
over 10 percent in the second quarter, and our approach toward modeling and predicting core import
price inflation focuses on three main sources of increase. First are increases in foreign cost
pressures, which we proxy by CPIs, which have not been a particularly important driver of core
import prices as of late, though they are not negligible. Then the other two, which are more
important, are declines in the dollar, which push up our prices, and finally increases in commodity
prices because a lot of our imports, even core imports, which exclude oil and high-tech products,
still have a lot of commodity input into them. For the past few years, our experience has been that
the pass-through of declines in the dollar into core import prices has been relatively moderate. It
has definitely contributed materially to the increase in core import prices but not as much, we feel,
as the run-up in commodity prices, which has had a pretty substantial effect. One way that we can
sort of confirm that impression is that we know that the prices of imported material-intensive
products that have the most commodity input have gone up much more rapidly than prices of
finished goods, and that has been true over the past year as well. So for all of those reasons, we feel

August 5, 2008

27 of 145

that commodity prices have been the prime impetus for the run-up in core import price inflation.
Going forward, we take our guidance from the futures markets, which indicate that oil prices and
other commodity prices will flatten out. As a result, we anticipate that, relatively shortly, core
import price inflation also should start to decline. At the same time, our anticipation is that,
compared with the past few years, the dollar will fall less rapidly going forward than in the past, and
that should be another factor supporting our view that core import price inflation should diminish.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Steve, you might want to define “core import price inflation.”
It’s not analogous to the other core.
MR. KAMIN. Right. So, yes, thank you. In the case of core imports, we exclude oil,
which is very important, as well as computers and semiconductors.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I have a question similar to President Plosser’s. Both the
financial shock—the housing adjustment—and the big relative price shock you could say all in
different forms could hurt the rate of growth of the economy’s productive potential. You could say
that they all might, in some dimension, reduce the near-term expected path of potential growth. I
guess my question is that you have this “costly sectoral reallocation” alternative scenario—do you
attribute any effect on potential growth over the forecast period in your baseline to the combined
effect of the housing adjustment and the big relative price shock from energy?
MR. WILCOX. No. One of the facts that we learn from microeconomic data about, for
example, job flows is that there is always a huge, astonishing amount of churn—job destruction and
job creation—just astonishing; and that’s true even in normal macroeconomic times. So the
background radiation level is not zero. But we haven’t incorporated in our baseline any allowance
for greater cost, and that’s what this alternative scenario was intended to illustrate, making a pretty

August 5, 2008

28 of 145

generous allowance for the potential effect of that sectoral reallocation on the productive capacity of
the economy. But it’s a serious question.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. There’s one minor qualification to what David just said. We do
keep track of rough estimates of what we think that the rise in energy prices over the past few years
is possibly doing to trend productivity, and we’ve come up with estimates that maybe it’s 0.1. We
think that effect has been ongoing, and it is built into the data. In some sense it’s occurring, and so
in some sense it’s in our trend estimates. It is not as though our trends aren’t implicitly taking in the
fact that there’s an ongoing loss in productivity associated with rising energy prices.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I was just going to say that I thought the interesting thing
about that scenario was that it doesn’t really change your view about the appropriate path of
monetary policy going forward. It’s basically at the baseline. So even if you were to build in a
material change in potential growth, because of the effects on demand going forward it doesn’t
affect your view about the appropriate path of policy.
MR. WILCOX. The reason is that it operates like a classic supply shock, which presents
monetary policy with just simply a less pleasant policy menu to choose from; and in the context of
that costly sectoral reallocation, the economy is running closer to its productive capacity. Let’s see.
I lost my train of thought here.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Well, basically you can just stop there. [Laughter] It’s the
tradeoff between the two. Obviously, if you were more concerned about inflation outcomes than
real activity outcomes, you might tilt it a different way.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Isn’t it true, though, that changes in potential growth also have
demand effects as well—to some extent offsetting?
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Yes.

August 5, 2008

29 of 145

VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Yes. It means that it’s another way of saying that you
wouldn’t expect the estimates of the now-prevailing equilibrium real fed funds rate to be higher.
Not to stretch this too far, but another way of saying why the likely expected path or the appropriate
path of policy doesn’t change in terms of the nominal fed funds rate is that we have these offsetting
effects on demand.
MR. REIFSCHNEIDER. Yes.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Regarding a comment that Bill Dudley made
about housing prices, for financial institutions, it’s going to matter a lot whether we’re looking at a
decline from 15 percent to 20 percent or from 15 percent to 30 percent. Housing inventories, unsold
homes, are very high, and I guess I’m wondering again—we have gone over this a few times—what
factors are likely to get housing advancing if it’s not a sharp decline in housing prices? I’m having a
hard time understanding why the expectation would not be for a relatively sharp decline. I’m
translating the Greenbook/OFHEO numbers to Bill’s numbers, and I’m not sure, but it seems to me
that financial institutions ought to be thinking that a significant adjustment must still be in train if
we’re not expecting demand to pick up all of a sudden. The mortgage origination challenges are
there. Or is this disequilibrium just going to sit there for an extended period of time?
MR. WILCOX. I guess I would push back on the premise that we don’t have a pretty
significant adjustment in house prices built into our baseline. We have house prices as measured by
OFHEO declining 7 percent this year and another 5 percent in 2009, and I wouldn’t anticipate any
rebound in 2010. You know, our ability to measure where that would leave house prices relative to
some notion of fair valuation is incredibly imprecise. But one regression-based indicator that we
follow suggests that it would have house prices relative to rents swinging from a relatively high

August 5, 2008

30 of 145

valuation to a noticeably low valuation. Charles Fleischman illustrated this yesterday in his preFOMC briefing. The major factor that provides some reason for optimism is that construction starts
are now low enough that builders are making progress in chipping away their inventory of unsold
homes. The months’ supply figures remain extraordinarily high because the denominator is very
low; but in terms of units of unsold homes, my recollection is that we’ve chipped away about half
the run-up in terms of absolute number of units in inventory. We also have starts continuing to
come down materially from their current level. So we think that the process will begin to get
inventories into a more normal alignment.
MR. EVANS. The staff has been way out front in projecting the housing decline, and that
has been very helpful. Is there any dissonance between what Bill said and your pretty substantial
expectation of housing-price declines?
MR. WILCOX. I don’t think so.
MR. EVANS. Was it 15 to 20 or 15 to 30?
MR. DUDLEY. I think what makes it complicated, though, is that there’s a nonlinearity. If
the housing-price declines do turn out to be on the higher side, it then puts more stress on the
financial system and on credit availability, which then leads to a weaker economy, which then puts
more stress on the housing sector. So small differences in the path get amplified.
MR. EVANS. I agree with that chain and those risks, but what I thought I was hearing from
David was that the staff estimate has in it quite a substantial adjustment process in housing, and then
I would expect financial players to share that assessment.
MR. DUDLEY. I wasn’t really addressing the point estimate of where housing was going
as opposed to the uncertainty around that estimate. I would argue that the uncertainty around that

August 5, 2008

31 of 145

estimate is still quite wide. At some point it will be resolved. When it is resolved, that will be a
favorable development, but I don’t think we’re there yet.
MR. WILCOX. I would just augment Bill’s comment with two other observations. There’s
plenty of probability mass out in the tail. I think it actually is two-sided risk. We illustrated one
side of that risk in our “severe financial stress” scenario. The other point I would make is that our
projection for national house-price declines of 12 percent cumulative in 2008 and 2009 makes
plenty of room for a very much more severe decline in Florida, California, and other highly stressed
areas, and we have attempted to take that regional diversity into account. It’s a rough exercise, to be
sure, but we’re not oblivious to the fact that some areas are doing much worse than the average.
That is the nature of averages.
MR. EVANS. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Vice Chairman, did you have an intervention?
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. I was just going to say this. I think that you can do crude
estimates of likely total losses across the U.S. economy and credit markets in a scenario like the
baseline scenario in the Greenbook, and if you use Nellie Liang’s study or the stuff done in New
York, there’s a huge amount ahead still. Even though financial market prices now reflect an
expectation for house-price declines that are not significantly more optimistic than David’s baseline
scenario, I don’t think you can say with confidence now that financial institutions have already
provisioned for or written down losses to accommodate that. Because the trajectory of house prices
will depend in part on financial behavior—the availability of credit—as financial institutions catch
up and adjust to that and adjust capital and asset growth, et cetera, there is some risk that you’ll push
that expected path of house prices down further from where it is. So if institutions have to prepare
for the possibility that you’re going to have a much weaker economic outcome because there’s

August 5, 2008

32 of 145

some probability around that, then there’s a risk that they will produce that outcome through the
combined effects of their behavior, which is why we’re living with such a delicate balance.
MR. EVANS. They do seem to be taking out a lot of insurance on the downside, right—
like your Merrill Lynch put option?
MR. DUDLEY. They’ve had to pay a lot for not very much insurance in the case of Merrill
Lynch.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren—sorry. President Lacker, an
intervention?
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just to point out that it must be the case that
lower house prices have a positive effect on the homeownership rate. So there must be some
mitigation, some good effect. We’re obviously getting to where we need to get eventually. The
question I have for the staff about this is, Have you thought about the sequence? I mean, it strikes
me that we’re likely to get to a point of stability in prices and construction activity before we get
months’ supply back down to some historical norm. Because it’s sort of a stop variable, are you
guys expecting it to converge smoothly, and have you thought about what measures of activity you
expect to see stabilize first?
MR. WILCOX. We expect starts to stabilize next year, and that will be followed by a pretty
considerable period of several quarters with house prices finally stabilizing. But we think that
builders will look ahead and see that they’ve cut their additions to supply by enough to make even
more rapid progress against their inventory of unsold homes. The question of the dynamics of
house prices is a tricky one because it depends on what model of expectations one assumes that
homebuyers will have. If every homeowner were a rational economic being, then it’s pretty
unambiguous that a lower level of home prices would elicit greater optimism on the part of home

August 5, 2008

33 of 145

shoppers that, gee, the valuation is better compared with yesterday; I should be more enthusiastic
about getting into the housing market; I should be happier today than I was yesterday. I think it’s at
least an open question as to whether expectations aren’t more extrapolative than that. We haven’t
seen any diminution in, for example, the Michigan survey in response to what homeowners expect
to happen over the coming 12 months, and I think it’s a serious possibility that they look at their
recent experience and extrapolate that forward and conclude that over the next 12 months the user
cost of owning a home is going to be really high. We just don’t have a very good grip on exactly
what the dynamics of prices and housing demand will be.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lockhart.
MR. LOCKHART. I just want to point out that we hear a fair amount of anecdotal feedback
suggesting that just determining what is the net real price for a house is not so easy because of
incentives, particularly in multifamily but also new homes in general. You pay list, but you get a
Mercedes and a year’s worth of gasoline and your lawn mowed and a lot of things thrown in for the
seller to hold the price close to what the list is. So I don’t know how these things are actually
measured to take into account those kinds of incentives.
MR. WILCOX. I don’t know what the OFHEO does to capture the quality of automobile
that comes in the driveway. [Laughter] I suspect that there’s no adjustment for that.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. On the inventories and the sequencing, which I think is very interesting
because of how it plays out, I learned recently—and you can correct me if this is wrong—that, in
the inventory of new homes for sale, the way that’s counted includes permits that have been issued
even though there’s no home that’s been built. So a developer may get permits but may not have
started the home yet. It may just be sitting on a pile of permits. So if that’s correct, and I think it is,

August 5, 2008

34 of 145

it means that, if you think about the sequencing of what’s going to happen as demand begins to turn
around, those permits don’t have to get bought, but they may start building on permits that they’ve
already been issued and they haven’t started building yet. Is that a correct way of looking at the
data?
MR. WILCOX. I don’t know what the story is with regard to permits that you’re
mentioning. I do know that the cancellation rate of new home sales has declined a bit. Previously
we were emphasizing that the high level of cancellations that the builders were experiencing was
actually causing the supply situation to be even worse than one would infer from the Census Bureau
data. Now the cancellation rates have come down, and so that situation is not as severe as it was six
or nine months ago, I believe.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren, you have been patient.
MR. ROSENGREN. My question is for Steve. There have been judgmental adjustments to
the domestic forecast reflecting financial headwinds in the United States. I’m wondering if we
made the same adjustments for financial headwinds in Europe. You highlighted that residential
investment looks a bit different in Europe, but they do have a lot of capital losses in their banking
system. Their LIBOR–OIS spread is quite elevated, and at least in some European countries—
Ireland and Spain as well as the United Kingdom, which you mentioned—housing has been quite
soft. Are you doing judgmental forecasts to reflect those headwinds, or do we do it on the domestic
side but not for the European outlook?
MR. KAMIN. As you correctly point out, Europe, in particular, does indeed have a lot of
financial stresses; and some parts of Europe, particularly the United Kingdom as well as Ireland and
Spain, are looking at some very serious weaknesses on the housing side. So we are, indeed, kind of
in parallel but not exactly the same as our domestic colleagues building financial stresses into our

August 5, 2008

35 of 145

outlook. We don’t necessarily increase or decrease the amount of financial stress in our forecast in
lockstep with the domestic side. In particular, the European financial situation has probably gotten
a bit worse over the intermeeting period, but some indicators haven’t deteriorated to quite the extent
that they have in the United States. Nonetheless, we have built in a fair amount of financial stress.
One factor that’s worth keeping in mind is that we built it into our outlook fairly early on. So we
haven’t adjusted downward the outlook for Europe by that much compared with the last couple of
Greenbooks, but we had already built in quite a bit of weakening of activity, and a lot of that does
reflect both the direct effects of financial stresses as well as their knock-on effects on tightening
credit standards for banks.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. I have President Fisher, and then if it’s okay with everybody,
we should probably start our go-round. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Very quickly, I want to come back to the housing issue. You know, I’ve
been more pessimistic than I think anybody around the table from the standpoint of peak-to-trough
correction, and I find the numbers you mentioned very benign relative to my expectations. One
issue that I’m trying to understand a little better in terms of its likely effect is that the real bulge in
resets comes in 2009 to 2012 because that’s when the alt-A resets kick in. We talked about this
many, many moons ago, the ultra-poor documentation on those types of loans, in particular, and I’m
wondering to what degree you’re factoring this into your outlook going forward, particularly for
those out-years.
MR. WILCOX. We’re certainly aware of that. To my eye the numbers look astonishingly
negative. For foreclosures, we have 2.5 million foreclosures this year and another 2 million
foreclosures next year. We have a very bleak landscape built into the projection.
MR. FISHER. On that happy note, Mr. Chairman, thank you.

August 5, 2008

36 of 145

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, President Fisher. The go-round. President
Lockhart.
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The contours and basic outcomes of
Atlanta’s forecast are similar to the baseline of the Greenbook forecast. So I want to focus my
remarks this morning on the underlying assumptions in both forecasts—assumptions that I view as
pivotal and if we miscalculate could result in a longer-term policy error.
It seems that at every meeting there’s great uncertainty around the outlook, and this juncture
is no different. I perceive considerable uncertainty and debatable assumptions in the base-case
scenario. As I see it, the key assumptions broadly are that housing stabilizes, perhaps as indicated
by housing prices, in the second half of ’09. Inflation pressures intensify in the near term but then
abate because of economic slack and lower commodity prices and, as discussed, core import prices.
Recent declines in oil prices stick, and prices remain more or less flat. Certainly since the
Greenbook was published, we note the fluctuations just in the past few days that were referred to
earlier, and I also can’t dismiss geopolitical risks and the potential of a severe shock. Finally,
financial market stress will persist for some months but diminish next year. These assumptions,
using the respectable term “assumptions,” have the feeling to me of “bets,” not so respectable a
term. The policy assumption integral to both the Greenbook and the Atlanta forecasts could be
added to this, and that is that rate rises starting in 2009 won’t choke off improving growth and will
be enough to blunt remaining inflation pressures.
So I’ll devote my comments to input from regional and other contacts that either serve to
confirm or cast doubt on these assumptions. We oriented this cycle’s questions to our Atlanta and
Branch directors to, first, evidence of wage pressures and pass-through of higher costs. In
interpreting the feedback, we noted some confusion between a business’s management of its labor

August 5, 2008

37 of 145

costs versus general wage pressures. We heard that businesses are working to keep their total wage
bills in check by raising wages for key talent but letting less critical employees go or cutting their
work hours as an offset. The reduction in hours is attributed to some combination of weaker
product demand and increased average productivity. Rising unemployment appears to be keeping
wage demands in check. There are exceptions, such as the oil field services industry, for which
qualified staff are in short supply, and certain skilled industrial and business trades in which local
bottlenecks exist. In businesses enjoying strong export demand, some employers are utilizing
bonuses rather than commitment to permanent wage increases. So our regional contacts did not
indicate the development of broad-based underlying pressures on labor costs reflecting wage
demands. As for inflation pass-through, our contacts reported widespread and growing efforts to
pass through higher input costs. Pass-through efforts appear to be the rule rather than the exception.
As one Branch director put it, people are passing through costs like crazy using high energy costs as
cover.
The reports of my supervision staff regarding banking conditions indicate a continuing
decline in asset quality and a very nervous interbank funding market. Foreclosed properties, both
single-family and condo, are making up the majority of house sales and slowing the absorption of
the oversupply of new homes. Some contacts are very concerned about the prospect of a second
wave of foreclosures as option ARM mortgage borrowers, mostly concentrated in large states like
Florida and California—these are borrowers who are currently paying less than the accrued
interest—run up against maximum loan-to-value ceilings. New, higher GSE standards are resulting
in fewer borrowers being qualified, putting downward pressure on house prices and bringing more
foreclosures. Virtually all comparables for Florida residential valuation are based on forced sales
and foreclosures, we are told. Beyond the deterioration in real estate portfolios, banks are reporting

August 5, 2008

38 of 145

growing problems in credits to food distributors, restaurants, trucking, and other petroleum fuel or
input-intensive industries.
Based on my calls with financial market contacts, it seems that—no surprise—much of the
attention in financial markets has shifted from private fixed-income markets to Fannie and Freddie.
Fixed-income markets for private securities appeared to have improved relative to their lows since
the current financial turmoil began. Although significant concerns remain, it appears that
leveraged-loan deals are getting done. Volume is down, spreads are up, and the deals are very
conservative, but deals are getting done. That said, one of the patterns in my calls over the past year
has been that, every time one concern abates, another seems to jump up and take its place.
Although the recent legislation appears to have alleviated concerns about the Fannie and Freddie
senior debt, my contacts indicate that there is widespread uncertainty about what will happen to
junior securities if the Treasury injects funds. Furthermore, more than once I heard the view that
foreign holders of GSE debt are concerned that their positions are not as safe as they believed. One
contact mentioned that the 18-month term of the guarantee is reportedly affecting some holders’
maturity choices. In response to my question about the relative weakness of European banks, one
contact suggested that they have booked much of their troubled assets in the “hold to maturity”
account, suggesting slower recognition of losses and difficulties ahead. We confirmed with one
large regional bank CFO significant deterioration of HELOCs in their portfolio and, by implication,
broadly among regional banks. The option ARM problem, by contrast, is perceived to be possibly
the next shoe to drop but, as I said earlier, not uniformly distributed across the country. Finally, we
heard the view that markets perceive banks as facing protracted difficulty raising capital.
To conclude, the downside risks to growth have not diminished in my opinion. On the flip
side, I agree that the upside risks to inflation are obviously a serious concern. In particular, I put a

August 5, 2008

39 of 145

fair amount of weight on the possibility that inflation will not moderate sufficiently without a more
substantial tightening of monetary policy than that projected in the Greenbook baseline. My
intermeeting internal and external discussions make it difficult for me to dismiss some of the
alternative scenarios in the Greenbook, specifically the “severe financial stress” scenario, the
“typical recession” scenario, and the “inflationary spiral” scenario; and in a high-uncertainty
environment, I don’t view any of these scenarios as exclusive of another. That said, I see the risks
to both the inflation and the growth objectives as very roughly in balance at this time. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Overall there has been little change in the
sentiment of my business contacts since our last meeting. Most are still reporting sluggish domestic
demand with little evidence of any improvement over the near term. On the price front, everyone
continued to cite cost pressures. Manufacturers have long lists of materials cost increases, while
retailers note large increases in wholesale prices of imported consumer goods. Everyone discusses
how they are planning to continue passing these costs along to customers in second-round effects.
Undoubtedly weak market conditions will limit their efforts, but I suspect that many will be
successful in raising prices significantly.
Turning to the financial situation, to start I should note that I did hear some good reports
with regard to liquidity in Chicago financial markets. A contact at the Chicago Mercantile
Exchange told us that they conducted extensive liquidity reviews for their largest clearing members,
with special scrutiny of firms that had substantial volumes of hard-to-value assets on their books.
The clearinghouse was very pleased with the results, finding that these firms had good access to
liquidity.

August 5, 2008

40 of 145

Overall, however, my financial conversations this round were relatively downbeat. I did
hear some interesting details, though, about the dynamics of the restructuring of credit
intermediation. With commercial-mortgage-backed securities markets effectively shut down, a
highly rated owner-developer of high-end shopping malls described his increasingly difficult
attempts to find funding for his regular flow of balloon payments on mortgage properties. He has
gone from restrictive loans from life insurance companies to attempting to put together his own
structured-debt securitization. They want to issue bonds backed by the revenues generated from a
pool of their high-quality properties and sell them to major fixed-income investment funds. This is
one example of what economists like Kashyap and Shin estimate will be a reduction of at least
$1 trillion in lending to nonfinancial institutions due to mortgage-related losses at U.S. financial
institutions. It is also an example of how firms are trying to find workarounds for the functions that
intermediaries used to do for them. But such restructuring must be raising the cost of financing in
ways that are not obviously amenable to mitigation through liquidity policies.
Turning to the national outlook, the information we have received over the past several
weeks has contained many crosscurrents, but overall our forecast for output growth is little changed
from our June projections. With regard to prices, I am concerned that inflation risks continue to
grow. The most recent news on core prices has not been good. Oil prices may be coming off the
boil, but they are still scalding. Prices are still down only to where they were in May. My
impression from my contact calls is that the ultimate pass-through to final product prices of earlier
increases could take a disconcertingly long period of time. Furthermore, I continue to think that the
current funds rate in conjunction with our enhanced lending facilities represents a quite
accommodative monetary policy stance, even given the disruptions in financial markets. If the
policy path remains as accommodative as futures markets expect, then improvement in inflation will

August 5, 2008

41 of 145

most likely require fortuitous favorable developments in inflation expectations and more restraint
from resource slack than we might have otherwise expected.
This brings me to three considerations that I would like to highlight as we evaluate the riskmanagement positions underlying our views on appropriate policy and our economic projections.
The first factor is that, according to many econometric estimates, the 5¾ to 6 percent unemployment
rate envisioned in the projections would provide only very modest restraint on inflation. In
addition, costly reallocation could lead to less resource slack, perhaps temporarily driving the
NAIRU above 5 percent. You know, when I talk to my staff, they assure me that there are very
good reasons, demographically based, to believe a NAIRU under 5 percent. But I tend to think I’ve
read a few too many papers on policy and policy mistakes where that’s exactly the issue—when you
think the sustainable unemployment rate is lower than it actually is. So that’s a risk, I think.
The second factor is that many individuals and businesses see the large relative price
changes in oil, food, and commodities as precursors to more-persistent inflation. Whether or not
their assessments are analytically correct depends on their expectations of our policy response. A
substantive response may be necessary to prevent self-fulfilling price increases and keep inflation
under control. Words can take us only so far.
The third consideration is the potential diminishing returns through our efforts to mitigate
distressed financial market conditions. It is my interpretation that our current accommodative
monetary policy and suite of lending facilities are set to mitigate severe downside risks and the
systemic risks that you mentioned earlier, Mr. Chairman. This is helpful under the assumption that
reducing liquidity strains will assist financial markets to return to normal operations and prevent a
permanent impairment of our financial infrastructure. But financial conditions seem unlikely to
return to our previous perceptions of normal, at least for some time. Thus, I see a risk that extra

August 5, 2008

42 of 145

accommodation intended to grease the financial wheels could be left in place too long and prove
counterproductive for price stability. Indeed, the old perception of “normal” likely is not the correct
benchmark for us to use in looking for whether we are experiencing structural changes in the
intermediation process in which new liquidity providers are playing enhanced roles in the lending
process and in which risk standards are changing. So when thinking about market functioning, it
would be useful to discuss this within a longer-term framework of what we can feasibly expect from
market functioning and what central bank liquidity has the ability to usefully and appropriately
influence. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Mr. Chairman, I may have to leave the lunch early. So before I start, I do
want to bid Rick adieu. Rick, I remember describing you as charming in one of our early meetings.
You have charmed me by your intellect and devotion. Anyway, I’m going to miss you. So I
wanted to say that in case I do have to leave early.
Mr. Chairman, in the intermeeting period, I spent almost as much time in President
Rosengren’s District as I did in my own—part as vacation but the rest consulting with some
advisers and mentors in the People’s Republic of Cambridge at my alma mater. [Laughter] I
mention this because I want to underscore that, in arguing a perspective, I tend to move away from
the rather felicitous circumstances that prevail in my District. Even though things are slowing, we
still expect employment growth to come in a little short of 2 percent a year, and our banking
situation thus far is holding up rather well.
In terms of my national soundings, and you know the list and the group is familiar with it,
the anecdotal evidence from everyone—from the bankers to the credit card companies to retailers to
fuel producers, food producers, energy companies, shippers, equipment manufacturers,

August 5, 2008

43 of 145

homebuilders, and entertainment companies—confirms reports of progressively higher obstacles to
growing their top lines and continued efforts to drive down their cost of goods sold through
reducing their head counts, running very tight inventory cycles, tightening their operating expenses,
and reexamining and in many cases cutting back significantly on cap-ex. Nationally I expect
continued anemia on the growth side. We are, as you know, not at the extreme but at the low end of
expectations for economic growth. I would expect zero growth as we approach year-end. As I said
earlier, from our perspective we’re only about two-thirds through the peak-to-trough correction on
housing, and I view that as a continued weak influence. So the summary is that most of my contacts
are planning around expectations of a prolonged U.S. and advanced-country slowdown and have a
rather woeful outlook as to the growth side.
At the same time, there is also a woeful concern with regard to price pressures—intensifying
cost pressures affecting their margins at a time when the stock market is most unforgiving of people
who miss their mark. Even in the First District, I might note. I want to quote the Beige Book report
from Boston: “Almost all contacted manufacturers voiced concerns about elevated . . . costs. . . .
Respondents generally have raised their selling prices in recent months. . . . Over one-half of
contacts expect to increase their selling prices further in the second half of 2008 and/or early 2009.”
It went on to say that, while some contacts express worry that price increases have led or will lead to
loss of market shares, others indicate that—and these are the key operative words—“customers have
become more receptive to price increases because they see them as a consequence of generalized
cost pressures.” Mr. Chairman, that passage captures the message that I’m receiving from my CEO
and CFO contacts around the country. By and large, we appear to be transitioning from vigilance
on the price front to acquiescence. Inflation expectations are, I think, becoming unmoored, and I
believe they are, if not already adrift, at risk of drifting.

August 5, 2008

44 of 145

On the small business front, I do like to look at Bill Dunkelberg’s recent reports from the
National Federation of Independent Business. His most recent report indicates that the percentage
of small business owners citing inflation as “the number one problem they face,” rose to 20 percent
in June, the highest rating since 1982, and that 41 percent of his respondents report raising selling
prices. At the other extreme of size, to put this in perspective, Wal-Mart’s CEO for the United
States reported last week—and I quote this: “My biggest concern is inflation. This month we had
an experience that Wal-Mart has never ever”—that’s literally what he said—“had before, which is
that a major supplier told us we need a 9 percent increase or we will not supply you at all.” Now, he
did not mention the name of that supplier. It could have been Unilever, which saw the volume of
goods it ships slip 0.5 percent year over year in the second quarter. Yet according to our
conversations but also quoted in the Wall Street Journal on August 1, Unilever’s CEO reported that
he “raised average prices on his thousands of products 7.4 percent,” and then added that he “doesn’t
plan to reverse any price increases.” Or it could have been one of the largest snack food companies,
whose CFO has informed us that, after taking and having stick a 9 percent increase in price in
March—I reported this at our last meeting—they will effect another 9½ percent increase in October.
Here’s the pithy quote he gave me: “Thus far we’ve been bleeding out price increases to our
customers. Now our strategy is to bludgeon them—to broadcast our increases in the expectation
that competitors will do the same.” I doubt the supplier to Wal-Mart was Kodak. Last week the
New York Times reported that “hurt by higher manufacturing and materials costs, the company said
it will combat these cost pressures by passing on to consumers and raising prices on some products
by as much as 20 percent.”
I have lots of examples of similar responses. President Evans indicated similar pressures.
President Lockhart did too. I’m not going to go through them. I will add, by the way, the one thing

August 5, 2008

45 of 145

that surprised me. Despite Disney’s brilliant annual report of record earnings, they, too, plan to
raise their single day prices by 5 percent, to $60, in the next quarter. There is also a growing
feeling, which I haven’t heard before, among semiconductor manufacturers that, after years and
years of constant price deflation, they expect that there may—and the operative word is “may”—be
a bottoming out because of the raw materials prices they face and the wage prices and pressures
they are receiving in China, which has become a major semiconductor manufacturer.
One might take heart from the recent correction in commodity prices. I agree with Steve
that we have to be very careful about that. My smartest energy contacts have been expecting a
correction in prices. Markets were overshooting. Natural gas prices have reacted to recent
developments like the Barnett Shale and, even more important, the so-called Haynesville Play in
Louisiana. The “oilies” note that increased Saudi supply hit our shores with the normal six-week
lag. They were talking about production increases in May and June, and those have just hit our
shores recently. So they’re not surprised at the price reaction at the pump. But none feels that the
basic demand–supply situation has been dramatically altered—much as you argued, Steve—and
most expect structural prices to obtain at or near current levels. Now, what does “at or near current
levels” mean in terms of price impact? I had a long conversation with the CEO of Burlington
Northern, and just for data purposes, in terms of what they call their RCAF—an automatic costadjustment contract that covers 25 percent of the goods shipped by their rail—their third-quarter
RCAF is 17 percent. The 75 percent of products that are not covered by that automatic contract are
subject to a fuel surcharge. That fuel surcharge at $120 a barrel is a 30 percent increase for the third
quarter.
One might also take comfort in the purported calmness in compensation growth seen so far,
along the lines of what I read in the Financial Times by Mark Gertler on July 29. I don’t hear

August 5, 2008

46 of 145

confirmation of that benign argument among business operators. First, as President Evans and Mr.
Stockton pointed out in our last meeting, labor compensation is not a good predictor of inflation. I
remember Dave said that it’s not that labor costs, which are a significant chunk of business costs,
don’t matter but that you can’t necessarily take comfort from the well-behaved compensation thus
far that you are not going to confront some inflation problems going forward. Now, the last
anecdote I want to give you illustrates that point. Yesterday I had a lengthy visit with the CFO of
General Mills. Until their fiscal year ’08, which ended in May, they priced over many years an
average increase of 0 percent. They took 2½ percent as the year ended, and they’re taking another 5
percent this year. They are having to reexamine their elasticity models, he said. Here is what he
said that worried me the most: They are finding those models less predictive because (a)
“everybody is raising prices,” and (b) consumer perception is that inflation is back. So, again,
vigilance is giving way to acquiescence.
Mr. Chairman, I do want to comment very briefly on something I mentioned last time,
which regards calculating the cost of goods sold. I am hearing more and more from companies that
have shifted production to China a verification of the 18 percent number that the ministry gave us.
Whether it’s a hospital producer whom I talked to in California or a Black & Decker tool assembler
in China, they’re complaining not only about cost increases of 15 to 20 percent, depending on
whether you’re operating in the north or south, but also about the employee contract law that was
just put into place, which in essence allows for almost an old-fashioned scala mobile Italian/French
model, which feeds a wage–price spiral, and it is beginning to infect their wage cost and inject
rigidities into their ability to operate in China.
So overall, Mr. Chairman, I am concerned, obviously, about economic growth. I think we,
as President Lockhart mentioned, are in a very difficult spot. We have three enormously worrisome

August 5, 2008

47 of 145

scenarios facing us. I think we have to be very careful how we word ourselves on inflation. Last
night at 6:00 National Public Radio opened their Marketplace report with this headline: “The Fed
Fuels Your Pain.” We have a perception issue that we must address, and there are two ways to do
it. One is by being strong in terms of how we argue the case of inflation. The other is to act by
raising rates. I’m going to listen very, very carefully because, frankly, I’m undecided here as to
what the right approach is. But I think we have to be careful when we state a balance of risks,
which are enormous, that we don’t understate the fact that inflation is now being accommodated in
the minds of the marketplace. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Fisher, I’m going to ask you a very innocent
question. You’ve given many chilling anecdotes over the last few meetings about increases in
prices, but the official statistics just don’t show anything like that outside of oil, gas, gasoline, and
the direct commodity price increases. Do you believe that the CPI is not an accurate measure?
MR. FISHER. Well, I do see the CPI rising. The monthly report was not encouraging. The
last 12 months have not been encouraging, and I think what worries me is the spread between core
and headline. Core is rising as well, by the way. Even our own estimates indicate that. I do see it
in headline numbers. The numbers I saw that were just reported I thought were quite alarming.
You are seeing the pass-through. You’re hearing evidence of this in the anecdotal reports. I do
believe, Mr. Chairman, that it’s visible in the data. I’m just trying to report what I’m hearing from
the field against the background of much more sophisticated analysis, which I respect enormously.
What I’m worried about is the perception.
I do believe that the data are very imperfect on inflation expectations—I noticed that David
said that about the further-out expectations in the Michigan survey. If you look at the reliability of
the data, the one-year survey, which has risen significantly, has been quite reliable over time. The

August 5, 2008

48 of 145

five-to-ten-year—I don’t know if they’re talking about ten years, five years, or somewhere between
the two, and I don’t think statistically that’s been a very accurate indicator historically, but I’m not
sure about that. So we have very imperfect hard data on inflation expectations, and I think that’s
when anecdotal evidence may be helpful. All I’m trying to do, Mr. Chairman, is report to you what
I’m hearing from the field, and not from my District, and I hope it is useful in the deliberations.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Mishkin.
MR. MISHKIN. I think there’s no question that headline inflation is very high right now.
Clearly, when you get these kinds of increases in energy prices and food costs, you’re going to have
to reflect them in current prices. In fact, that’s exactly what you need to have happen so that relative
prices shift. The reality is that high oil prices have to mean that real wages fall. People have to
conserve and not drive as much and so forth. So this is a normal process, and monetary policy does
not control these relative price shifts. What I think is more critical is that, although there are some
problems in terms of core, the effect has actually been quite limited given the incredible rise in
energy prices. While it’s important to think about headline in the long run, the information from
core is very useful in terms of thinking about policy because it tells you whether this is spilling over
into underlying inflation.
One of my concerns about going to anecdotal information and why I think we need to use an
analytic framework in thinking about what is really driving the inflation process is that we do need
to focus on the longer-run because that’s what monetary policy can control. I get a bit nervous
about these anecdotal concerns, which I think can tell us something about headline. Then we have
to ask what they tell us about the longer-run context but not put too much weight on them. That’s
one reason that I think some of the analytic frameworks that we’ve developed here are very useful
for thinking about these things. Thank you.

August 5, 2008

49 of 145

MR. FISHER. Well, in terms of the weight, again, I’m just one of 17 or 18, and I would
weigh it accordingly. But I am worried that we’ve had a spread between headline and core for a
long period now. I am worried that we’re seeing core expectations pick up—modestly but they are
beginning to pick up. I am worried that core expectations are above 2 percent. And I am
particularly worried about developments on the global wage front in terms of how it affects the cost
of goods sold here in the United States.
One last thing that I just started to detect—and again, it’s all just hearsay—but I’m
increasingly hearing reports of concerns of people who operate companies about the welfare of their
employees and about their ability to pay transportation costs, pay food costs, and maintain the value
of their 401(k) plans and, as President Lockhart reported, some way to try to manage, if not through
formal demands on wages, at least to try to cushion their welfare. These are marginal influences,
and I don’t disrespect the analytical side. I do worry that data capture history, and I’m trying to give
myself a sense for what is happening at the margin in terms of microeconomic behavior, and the
report is only what it’s worth. It’s just one input in the many. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Bullard.
MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic activity in the Eighth District has
remained roughly stable during the summer. Activity in the services sector has increased slightly,
and except for the auto industry, manufacturing activity is also stable to slightly higher. Automotive
contacts reported a variety of plans to lay off workers or to idle production, and at least three
automotive parts suppliers will close plants in the District. Contacts in the auto industry are not
optimistic that production will increase in the short term. Retail and auto sales have softened in
recent weeks, and some District retail contacts have expressed concerns about summer sales. Many
contacts continue to emphasize commodity price levels as a key factor in business decisions. They

August 5, 2008

50 of 145

are concerned both about the necessary business adjustments, given the new pricing structure, and
about the implications for the overall level of inflation going forward.
The residential real estate sector continues to decline. Across four of the main metropolitan
areas in the District, home sales through May declined about 18 percent compared with 2007,
whereas single-family construction permits declined about 40 percent. The number of foreclosures
in the St. Louis area in the second quarter increased to about 6,300 filings, up about 77 percent from
last year. I am impressed, however, with the regionalism in the foreclosure situation, as some areas
of the nation continue to have far higher foreclosure rates than others. In contrast with the generally
positive reports in commercial real estate activity for the earlier part of 2008, recent reports have
indicated more uneven conditions in the nonresidential real estate sector across the District.
Turning to the national outlook, I was encouraged by the recent GDP report for the second
quarter, which showed growth at an annual rate of 1.9 percent. Real final sales increased at an
annual rate of 3.9 percent. It now appears that the worst quarter associated with the current episode
of financial turmoil was probably the fourth quarter of 2007, when the economy abruptly stalled.
The slow- or no-growth period was through the winter, with the economy gradually regaining
footing through the spring and summer. If there were no further shocks, I would expect the
economy to grow at a more rapid rate in the second half of this year. But there has been another
shock—namely, substantial increases in commodity and energy prices. I think it’s important to be
careful not to confuse the effects of this latter shock with the effects of the housing-sector shock.
My sense is that the level of systemic risk associated with financial turmoil has fallen
dramatically. For this reason, I think the FOMC should begin to de-emphasize systemic risk
worries. My reasoning is as follows. Systemic risk means that the sudden failure of a particular
financial firm would so shock other ostensibly healthy firms in the industry that it would put them

August 5, 2008

51 of 145

out of business at the same time. The simultaneous departure of many firms would badly damage
the financial services industry, causing a substantial decline in economic activity for the entire
economy. This story depends critically on the idea that the initial failure is sudden and unexpected
by the healthy firms in the industry. But why should this be, once the crisis has been ongoing for
some time? Are the firms asleep? Did they not realize that they may be doing business with a firm
that may be about to default on its obligations? Are they not demanding risk premiums to
compensate them for exactly this possibility? My sense is that, because the turmoil has been
ongoing for some time, all of the major players have made adjustments as best they can to contain
the fallout from the failure of another firm in the industry. They have done this not out of
benevolence but out of their own instincts for self-preservation. As one of my contacts at a large
bank described it, the discovery process is clearly over. I say that the level of systemic risk has
dropped dramatically and possibly to zero.
Let me stress that, to be sure, there are some financial firms that are in trouble and that may
fail in the coming months or weeks depending on how nimble their managements are at keeping
them afloat. This is why many interest rate spreads remain elevated and may be expected to remain
elevated for some time. These spreads are entirely appropriate for a financial system reacting to a
large shock. But at this point, failures of certain financial firms should not be regarded as so
surprising that they will cause ostensibly healthy firms to fail along with them. The period of
substantial systemic risk has passed. Of course, we have also endured a bout of systemic risk
worries stemming from the operations of the GSEs. However, my view is that the recent legislation
has addressed the systemic risk component of that situation as well. Because of these
considerations, my assessment is that the chances of unchecked systemic risk pushing the U.S.
economy into a severe downturn at this point are small, no larger than in ordinary times.

August 5, 2008

52 of 145

Unfortunately, while the threat from this source is retreating, another threat is upon us—
namely, a substantial shock from increased energy and certain commodities prices, which is leading
many to forecast slower growth during the fall. Real automotive output subtracted 1.1 percentage
points from real GDP growth in the second quarter. Many contacts seem to attribute this largely to
consumer reaction to increased gasoline prices. If this is true, then it seems to me that some of the
most visible reaction to this shock may have already occurred, being pulled forward into the second
quarter.
Labor markets have been weak, but I am not as pessimistic as most on this dimension. So
far this year, the U.S. economy has shed about 387,000 nonfarm payroll jobs as compared with a
drop in employment of 402,000 jobs during the first seven months of 2003 or 315,000 during the
first seven months of 2002. Neither of these latter two episodes is associated with the recession
label. These two years might provide better historical guides to the behavior of today’s economy
than those associated with the recession label, such as 2001, 1990–91 or 1980–82. This is one
reason that I think the labeling game can mislead us in our thinking about the economy.
The main contribution that the FOMC can make to the economy is to keep inflation low and
stable. The headline CPI inflation rate is running close to 5 percent measured from one year earlier.
The University of Michigan survey of inflation expectations one year ahead reflects this reality with
the most recent reading at 5¼ percent. The June CPI annualized inflation rate was a 1970ssounding 13.4 percent. Of course, much of this is due to energy prices. Still, with these kinds of
numbers we’re going to have to do more than talk about inflation risks. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Developments during the intermeeting
period have heightened my concern about downside risks to economic growth and slightly

August 5, 2008

53 of 145

allayed my concern about upside risks to inflation. Let me begin with growth. The moderate
growth rate registered in the second quarter was disappointing, especially because it benefited
from the temporary effects of the fiscal stimulus package. Moreover, the pattern of consumer
spending during the quarter, with weakness in June, is worrisome. With all the publicity
surrounding the rebate checks, households may have put them to work earlier than usual,
especially since they were facing significantly higher prices for food and gasoline. This
interpretation does not bode well for activity in the current quarter. Assuming no change in the
funds rate this year, we have lowered our forecast for real GDP growth for the second half of the
year about ⅓ percentage point, to just ¾ percent, and project a correspondingly higher
unemployment rate.
Our forecast for weak second-half growth reflects not only the unwinding of fiscal
stimulus but also adverse financial sector developments. The credit crunch appears to have
intensified since we last met. Evidence of tighter financial conditions abound. Risk spreads and
the interest rates charged on a variety of private loans, including mortgages, are up noticeably,
and lending standards have tightened further. Credit losses have risen not only on mortgages but
also on auto loans, credit cards, and home equity lines of credit. As a consequence, the list of
troubled depository institutions is growing longer. IndyMac and First National will not be the
last banks in our region to fail. Indeed, the decline in broad stock market indexes is partly a
reflection of the market’s concerns about the health of the financial sector. Many financial
institutions are deleveraging their balance sheets and reducing loan originations. For example, a
large bank in my District has begun now in earnest to cancel or cap outstanding home equity
loans and lines of credit, despite an ongoing concern about alienating consumers. Tighter credit
is affecting demand. Anecdotal reports suggest that the plunge in July car sales partly reflects a

August 5, 2008

54 of 145

tightening of credit standards for auto loans and leases. A large bank reports a substantial drop
in demand for mortgage credit in response to the recent rise in mortgage interest rates, and the
anecdotal reports that we hear support the Greenbook’s negative view of the effect of credit
conditions on investment in nonresidential structures.
The housing sector is of considerable concern. House prices have continued to fall at a
rapid rate, and futures prices suggest a further decline of around 10 percent over the next 12
months. This forecast seems reasonable given the overhang of homes for sale, the recent rise in
mortgage rates, and the tightening of credit. Unfortunately, the risk of an adverse feedback loop
from tighter credit to higher unemployment, to rising foreclosures, to escalating financial sector
losses, to yet tighter credit remains alive and well, in my opinion. Indeed, stress tests conducted
by some of the large financial institutions in our District reveal an exceptionally high sensitivity
of credit losses to both home-price movements and unemployment. The “severe financial stress”
simulation in the Greenbook illustrates my concern. It is not my modal forecast, but it certainly
seems well within a reasonable range of outcomes. The probability of such a scenario has risen,
in my view, since we met in June.
One partially mitigating factor that should help to support consumer spending is the drop
in the price of oil since our last meeting. But to the extent that the decline in oil prices partly
reflects reduced expectations for global growth, the net impetus from stronger domestic spending
will be offset by weaker export growth. Continued declines or even stabilization in oil prices
will, however, be good for inflation. We have revised down slightly our forecast for core
inflation as a consequence. Moreover, the fact that we were not once again surprised on the
upside by oil prices has had a small favorable effect on my perception of inflation risks going
forward. That said, inflation risks obviously remain. Even with the recent decline, energy prices

August 5, 2008

55 of 145

are well above year-ago levels and are not only pushing up headline inflation but also spilling, to
some extent, into core. Higher headline inflation could undermine our credibility and raise
inflation expectations. If the public concludes that our implicit inflation objective has drifted up,
workers may demand higher compensation, setting off a wage–price dynamic that would be
costly to unwind.
Fortunately, the reports I hear are consistent with the view that no such dynamic has
taken hold. My contacts uniformly report that they see no signs of wage pressures. They note
that high unemployment is suppressing wage gains. Growth in our two broad measures of labor
compensation are low and stable; and taking productivity growth into account, unit labor costs
have risen only modestly. I tend to think of the chain of causation in a wage–price spiral running
from wages to prices, but it is certainly possible that the causation also, or instead, runs in the
opposite direction. Either way, though, faster wage growth is an inherent part of the process by
which underlying inflation drifts up, and at present we see not the slightest inkling of emerging
wage pressures.
Growth in unit labor costs also remains at exceptionally low levels. I would also note
that I have looked for evidence of some increase in the NAIRU due to sectoral reallocation by
examining the Beveridge curve, thinking that if there were sectoral reallocation we might see an
outward shift in the Beveridge curve. I have detected no evidence of such an outward shift.
These facts provide me with some comfort. Moreover, various measures of longer-term inflation
expectations suggest that they remain relatively well contained. When we met in June, the
Michigan survey of inflation expectations five to ten years ahead had recently jumped a couple
tenths of a percentage point. I argued then that the respondents to that survey typically
overrespond to contemporaneous headline inflation. Since that meeting, oil prices have come

August 5, 2008

56 of 145

down a bit, and so have the Michigan survey measures. Assuming that the funds rate is raised
from 2 percent to 3 percent in 2009, my forecast shows both headline and core PCE inflation
falling to about 2 percent in that year. So, in summary, during the intermeeting period, my
forecast for economic growth has weakened, and that for inflation has edged down slightly. I
consider the risks to our two policy objectives pretty evenly balanced at the present time.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. My outlook for economic growth and
inflation over the next few years is broadly similar to the one that I held last meeting, although I
think that the prospects for both inflation and economic growth in the near term have
deteriorated since June. To a close approximation, my outlook ends up looking very similar to
the Greenbook’s baseline scenario.
The most significant change I am making to my outlook is to mark down the prospects
for business fixed investment this year and next, based on the reports that I am hearing from the
manufacturers in my District. There is an interesting short-term/long-term dynamic taking place
in the manufacturing sector. The manufacturing CEOs with whom I have spoken say that over
the long term they are very bullish on America. The dollar depreciation, increased transport
costs, and rising wages in China all favor more U.S.-based production. A senior executive from
Alcoa told me that, in his 35 years of working in the manufacturing sector, he has never seen the
fundamentals point so strongly toward the United States as a profitable location for
manufacturing. The short term, however, presents a more mixed picture for manufacturers.
Although some industries, such as power generation equipment and aerospace, are running flat
out and expect to continue doing so, companies in other manufacturing industries have received
or expect to receive order cancellations. In particular, the manufacturers that supply the

August 5, 2008

57 of 145

automotive and commercial construction sectors are reporting a worsening outlook. Perhaps the
best way to summarize the sentiments that I am hearing from manufacturers is to say that they
see a bright future but they see challenging conditions over the next 12 months.
We all know that housing markets are extremely weak. Housing prices began their
decline earlier in Cleveland than in the rest of the country, and we are now seeing some stability
in housing prices. Despite that hopeful glimmer, we have not seen any pickup in home sales.
Based on this experience, it seems that we still have a long way to go nationally before we see
any pickup in residential construction.
In regard to financial markets, my chief concern is that lending is going to be constrained
by lenders needing to maintain sound capital ratios in the face of asset write-downs and loan
charge-offs. Balance sheet constraints and a declining risk appetite on the part of bankers mean
that some worthy borrowers are going to be rationed out of credit markets, further restraining
economic activity.
Turning to inflation, I anticipate that price pressures will intensify further before we see
some relief, just as the Greenbook baseline scenario depicts. Manufacturers are still raising their
prices in response to rising prices for raw materials that they purchase. Some companies have
had fixed-price contracts in place for five and ten years, and as these contracts mature, the
companies are passing on huge price increases to their customers. Consequently, I think that
even after a point at which energy and commodity prices flatten out, prices at the wholesale and
retail levels are likely to adjust upward for a while longer.
I just said that manufacturers are expecting some challenging times ahead. One reason is
that many of them are caught between weakening demand conditions and soaring input costs.
Sherwin-Williams represents an extreme case, but I think it illustrates the situation pretty starkly.

August 5, 2008

58 of 145

The CEO of Sherwin-Williams told me last week that their business is down more than
20 percent in sales channels both to new construction and to existing homes. They have been in
business for 126 years, and the last time this occurred was during the Great Depression. Despite
these dismal sales, they are having to raise prices. The CEO told me that the company typically
raises prices once a year, but in July they announced their third price increase this year. In the
entire history of the company, they have never before had three price increases in one year.
So I continue to see the risk to my projection for output as being to the downside for the
reasons that we have been discussing for some time—high energy prices, severe financial stress,
and a depression in the housing markets. The risk to my inflation outlook is weighted to the
upside because I am concerned that inflation could remain elevated for too long, potentially
destabilizing inflation expectations. The Greenbook baseline scenario expects the near-term
inflation picture to worsen in the second half of this year before improving gradually over the
entire forecast period. This pattern is a concern to me. In that environment, I worry that inaction
on our part before next year could be seen as complacency on our part. So when I stack up the
two risks against one another, I regard them as fairly equal right now. But my outlook is
conditioned on a federal funds rate path that begins to increase about a quarter earlier than called
for in the Greenbook baseline. I will speak to the relevance of this factor when we discuss
monetary policy in the next go-round. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Economic conditions in the Third District
remain relatively weak, but they are not materially different from what we and our business
contacts have been expecting for the past several months. Manufacturing and residential
construction sectors continue to show a slow decline. Payroll employment in our three states fell

August 5, 2008

59 of 145

in June, but it is still above the levels of where it was three months ago and so has been
performing somewhat better than in the nation as a whole.
The pace of retail sales seems to have been softening, and commercial real estate firms
indicate that most office and industrial markets have weakened slightly since the spring. My
business contacts generally expect weak growth for a while. Manufacturers do expect a rebound
during the next six months; but most other sectors, particularly retail sales, anticipate only soft or
slightly improving conditions in the near term. Residential real estate is not expected to
strengthen appreciably in the second half of the year. Banks expect somewhat sluggish growth
in overall lending for the rest of the year, although compared with some regions, banks in our
District are in pretty good shape. There are stresses, but they seem to be manageable. Credit,
however, is generally available to businesses, and we hear only sporadic information from
businesses that they are unable to obtain needed loans.
For some time my business contacts have expressed concern about rising energy and
commodity and transport prices. Our business outlook survey’s prices-paid index rose yet again
in July, and it is now at its highest level since March 1980. Although the prices-received index
edged down slightly, it remains at a very, very high level relative to historical standards. The
BOS’s future prices-received index rose to 49.6 percent, which is the highest level it has been
since January 1989. This indicates that roughly half the manufacturing firms that responded to
our survey expect the prices they receive for their products to be increased over the next six
months. To gauge the extent to which manufacturing firms have been able to pass on rising costs
to their customers, we asked several special questions about product pricing in our July survey.
More than 60 percent of our respondents indicated that, since the beginning of the year, they
have been able to raise prices and pass along increased costs to their customers. About

August 5, 2008

60 of 145

26 percent said this took the form of increases in base prices. Almost half of them had increased
base prices. The rest said they have used either surcharges or escalator clauses and, in some
cases, combined those with base price increases as well. Surcharges and escalation clauses are
not likely to go away anytime soon and may even become more widespread. About 56 percent
of our respondents indicated that price escalation clauses and surcharges are likely to be a part of
their pricing in the future. Further, since a large number of firms have already built cost
increases into their base prices, it is not clear at all that prices will come down quickly, even if
oil prices stabilize at a lower level.
On the national level, the incoming data since our June meeting have been mixed but
largely in line with my expectations for the near-term path of the economy. Real GDP growth
for the second quarter came in somewhat weaker than many expected, although I will note that
as recently as April many people were expecting negative growth in the second quarter and it is
now almost 2 percent. But I think that the strength is a remarkable testament to the ability of this
economy to weather shocks from financial market disruptions, a severe housing correction, and
surges in energy and commodity prices. Nonfarm payroll employment has fallen an average of
66,000 jobs per month over the last seven months—a weak number to be sure but not nearly as
severe as the job losses over the last three recessions, which averaged nearly 180,000 jobs a
month. Since our June meeting, we have taken further steps to address fragile financial markets
that were manifested by the difficulties surrounding the GSEs and the IndyMac takeover.
On balance, my outlook for the economy is little changed, although the financial market
developments since our last meeting have marginally increased the uncertainty surrounding my
forecast. I do see near-term weak growth for the economy, but I continue to expect an
improvement in output and employment growth next year as the economy rebounds closer to

August 5, 2008

61 of 145

trend. Unfortunately, there has been a resurgence in financial market volatility, especially on the
part of the banking sector and mortgage markets related to the problems of the GSEs. The
liquidity in the interbank and primary dealer markets appears to have improved somewhat
relative to the first quarter of this year.
I read the conditions in the financial markets and the wide spreads on selected assets as
having improved somewhat on net and the spreads we are seeing increasingly reflecting real
credit risk as opposed to dysfunctional markets. As I indicated in my questions earlier, we
should not use such spreads as the primary criteria for assessing the fragility of the financial
markets. Moreover, we must be cautious in using monetary policy or other tools at our disposal
as a form of forbearance that delays the necessary adjustments in the pricing of various financial
claims. I think we need a high hurdle—that there are real market failures—before we intervene
to stem liquidity desires on the part of traders or attempt to influence the price of specific asset
classes. To agree with President Bullard’s comments, we should begin to deemphasize and destress the importance of systemic risk because I think it is gradually dissipating as firms adjust to
the more volatile and risky environment.
The current state of the financial markets seems to me to bear some resemblance to the
financial headwinds analogy that many people referred to during the early 1990s. Indeed,
spreads on many forms of business and consumer loans are behaving now much in the way as
they typically behave during recessionary times as credit risks rise. In the early ’90s, monetary
policy was less accommodative than it is now—at least the funds rate reached a low point of 3
percent from October 1992 to February 1994—and during that time headline PCE inflation ran
about 2 to 3 percent. The real funds rate, measured by a one-quarter-ahead forecast of the CPI
from the professional forecasters, was minus 0.1 percent over the six quarters from 1993:Q3 to

August 5, 2008

62 of 145

1994:Q4. Currently, the real funds rate using the same measure of one-quarter-ahead
professional forecasters’ CPI stands at minus 1.1 percent.
The inflation outlook remains a cause of concern. Headline inflation is higher, and there
is evidence of modest pass-through to core inflation measures. Inflation compensation on the
six-to-ten-year horizon has risen modestly. Inflation compensation at the near term has fallen
with recent declines in oil prices, but it remains volatile. The staff has suggested that a portion of
the increase in the longer-dated inflation compensation measures may reflect an increase in
inflation risk premiums. That is, markets are uncertain about the long-run path of inflation. This
is not terribly comforting. It suggests that our credibility may be waning.
Despite the recent drop in oil prices, I remain uncomfortable with the longer-term
inflation outlook. Indeed, the focus of monetary policy must be on the intermediate to longer
term, and we must resist the temptation to act as if our funds rate decisions can manage the
outcomes over the very near term. Year-over-year inflation, headline CPI and PCE inflation,
have now been consistently above 3 percent since October 1987. Year-over-year core PCE
inflation has exceeded 2 percent every month but one since April 2004. That is four years.
Businesses are reporting an increased willingness to pass on cost increases. Near term, we might
get some moderation in headline inflation, if the recent drop in oil prices holds. This might
result in less upward pressure on inflation expectations, at least in the near term. Of course, as
has been pointed out, oil prices are notoriously hard to predict, and we may well see a resurgence
in oil prices before the year’s end; but we don’t know. More important, a drop in oil prices will
only temporarily mask what I view as the underlying inflationary pressures. Oil prices have
clearly exacerbated the recent numbers and may mitigate them in the near term going forward.

August 5, 2008

63 of 145

But my concern is that the real source of intermediate-term to longer-term inflationary
pressures comes from our own accommodative policy, whose consequences for inflation will be
felt only over time. We are unable to control the rise in oil prices and its consequences for
inflation in the short term, but we must hold ourselves accountable for the longer-term
consequences of our choices. Should we maintain our accommodative stance for too much
longer, my view is that we are likely to see higher trend inflation in the intermediate term and a
ratcheting up of inflation expectations. If that scenario unfolds, it will take a much more costly
policy action to re-anchor those expectations than the cost of a preemptive move to raise the
funds rate in the near term.
To be sure, shifting policy to a less accommodative stance will be a difficult decision to
make, given the continued volatility in financial markets and the projected near-term weakness in
employment and output growth. However, what has been referred to as the tail risk of a very
negative growth outcome has decreased since the start of the year, whereas inflation risks have
increased. I think the enhancements we have made to our liquidity facilities should be sufficient
to address any remaining dysfunctions in the financial markets, but they will not address the
credit or solvency issues, nor should we expect them or desire them to do so. The markets will
have to do that admittedly heavy lifting. I do not believe that we can wait until employment
growth and the financial markets have completely turned around to begin to reverse course. But
by our aggressive attention to short-term risk to growth and financial turmoil, we do put at some
risk our ability to deliver on our intermediate- and longer-term goals of both price stability and
sustainable growth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Why don’t we take a coffee break until 11:20.
[Coffee break]

August 5, 2008

64 of 145

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. President Rosengren.
MR. ROSENGREN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Boston forecast used for the June
meeting expected that the unemployment rate would peak at approximately 5.7 percent.
Unfortunately, with the July employment report, the unemployment rate has already reached
5.7 percent, and we expect the economy is likely to grow less than potential for the next several
quarters. With the unemployment rate rising in the past three months by 0.7 percentage point and
payroll employment declining for the past six months, I am concerned that there remains a
significant risk that the second half of this year would look a lot like the “severe financial stress” or
“typical recession” scenarios. My concern reflects the potential impact of further deterioration
among financial institutions and financial markets that may create a significant headwind for the
economy and the likelihood that economic problems are growing in other countries, which would
slow one of the few bright spots in the economy—exports.
Since our last meeting, much has been written about the problems at the GSEs. Concern
with the viability of the GSEs and potential future losses has contributed to mortgage rates rising
despite our past easing, the weak economy, and diminished demand for mortgages. With financial
institutions showing little interest in lending to subprime or jumbo borrowers, the increased cost for
individuals that qualify for conforming loans is likely to weaken the one part of the housing market
that had been relatively resilient to financial problems to date. For potential buyers, higher interest
rates and the likelihood that housing prices will continue to fall provide little current incentive to
purchase a home, while the job losses are providing an immediate need for some owners to sell their
homes. We need the housing market and housing prices to stabilize, which I had hoped would
occur in the second half of this year, but now it looks as though it will be deferred until next year.

August 5, 2008

65 of 145

Falling housing prices have created significant collateral damage. Liquidity problems that
began one year ago remain in play. The capital-constrained financial institutions that are forced to
shrink their balance sheets may pose a significant additional problem in the second half of this year.
While many of the largest banks that suffered significant losses last year were able to raise
additional capital fairly readily, the capital losses on newly issued bank equity may have reduced
many investors’ appetite for providing new capital for banks until it is clear that the economy is
recovering. The falling national housing prices and problems in commercial real estate in some
sectors of the economy are now affecting regional and community banking institutions, many of
which are unlikely to get equity infusions and thus will be forced to shrink. A reduction in the
willingness to lend, as represented by the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, has often portended
a reduction in credit to bank-dependent borrowers. As we get a more traditional credit crunch
compounding the liquidity problems, I am concerned that credit will be less available to consumers
and businesses and further slow consumption and business investment.
Since the June meeting, the stock market has fallen 7 percent; and with the number of large
financial institutions experiencing very elevated CDS spreads and stock prices in the single digits,
the failure of one or more relatively large domestic or foreign financial institutions is a real
possibility. In such an environment, the assumption of annual equity prices rising 7 percent in the
rest of this year and 12 percent in 2009 as assumed in the Greenbook would seem to have some
significant downside risk. Elevated unemployment rates and a flat or slightly falling trend in wage
and salary inflation suggest an absence of the inflationary pressures in labor markets that would lead
to rising inflation once energy and food prices stabilize.
These factors give me some confidence that we will see core and total inflation in 2009
close to 2 percent. Since our last meeting, labor markets have been weaker than expected, and oil

August 5, 2008

66 of 145

prices and many other commodity prices have fallen, in part as a result of the concern with a
slowing global economy. Although total inflation measures are clearly higher than any of us would
want, these readings appear to be transitory responses to supply shocks that are not flowing through
to labor markets. In fact, evidence from the labor market would seem to indicate that the downside
risks to the economy are affecting labor markets through job losses but are not creating an
environment in which labor tries to offset supply shocks with higher wage demands. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Before I begin, let me add my words of
welcome to Betsy Duke, welcoming Governor Duke back to the Federal Reserve System. I say
“back” because she has served excellently on our board of directors beginning almost 1 years ago.
She’s a fast friend and strong supporter of the Federal Reserve System. I’m delighted that the long
wait for her installation is over, and I look forward to working with her; but I don’t want any of my
compliments to her to be detrimental to her effectiveness. [Laughter]
The Fifth District economy has remained weak in recent weeks. Manufacturing and service
sector activity fell. Real estate conditions remain sluggish. Labor markets remain soft. Export
activity remains the bright spot, with reports of sustained growth in outbound cargo at District ports.
In a new development, however, manufacturers’ expectations for the very near future turned
negative in our most recent survey. This is very unusual. Respondents are typically relatively
optimistic about things six months from now. Retail contacts indicate that the decline in sales
broadened in July in our survey, and there aren’t many reports mentioning the effect of tax stimulus
checks. Price expectations for both raw materials and final goods rose in our July survey, and some
of those measures are at record highs.

August 5, 2008

67 of 145

At the national level, my outlook for real growth is broadly consistent with the Greenbook’s
this time. I expect sluggish growth to continue through the remainder of the year, with a pickup
beginning sometime next year. Housing is likely to continue to be a drag, though a diminishing
one, until then. Consumer spending is likely to remain subdued, and business investment is likely to
moderate somewhat. I expect payroll employment to continue to decline for a while at about the
current pace—a pace that, as others have noted, is quite modest relative to what we typically see in a
recession. I think the most likely outcome is for us to continue to skirt an outright recession. I think
there is some risk of a broader and sharper contraction. I believe the magnitude of that risk is
modest, but it’s not negligible to me. Business investment could deteriorate, a risk that’s most
prominent in the nonresidential construction sector that we discussed earlier. But this is a small
component of aggregate demand, smaller than housing; and given the nature of gestation lags in this
sector, I think a downturn is likely to be gradual rather than abrupt. Household spending probably
poses the greatest risk to growth at this point. Consumer spending has flattened out in real terms,
although that’s what one would expect given the increase in food and energy prices that we’ve seen.
Given the difficulty of assessing the extent to which tax rebates are propping up consumer spending
right now, we do not know how much Q4 consumption is going to be affected by the stimulus
rolling off.
Potential growth effects of credit constraints or financial headwinds have gotten a lot of
attention these days. I remain skeptical about the magnitude of the drag on consumption and
investment spending that credit market conditions are likely to create. We have, of course, seen
reports in the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey of tightened credit terms, but through June both
C&I and consumer loans have continued to grow. I would note that we are hearing in the Fifth
District concerns from some of our smaller institutions that some large banks are bidding

August 5, 2008

68 of 145

aggressively for deposits—this has been going on for several months now, of course—and as a
result, the smaller banks are paying more to fund their loans. We’re also hearing now—and this is a
new report—of larger banks cutting back on fed funds lending to smaller institutions, no doubt out
of a concern about possible bank failures.
What I think we’re seeing in banking markets is more of a reallocation of activity among
banks. Different institutions have been affected very differently by recent events depending on the
strategies they chose to pursue in the years preceding this episode. As a consequence,
intermediation is just shifting from some institutions to others. In fact, we’ve heard of banks
picking up business that other banks are shedding. Anecdotes about particular banks cutting back
on lending thus need to be taken with a grain of salt, and I don’t think they’re necessarily
representative of the banking sector as a whole. In fact, there was a really egregious case in the New
York Times of people not getting credit from banks because of this credit crunch. In paragraph 6,
one is introduced to their lead anecdote: a borrower at Wachovia who was denied credit. In
paragraph 22, we find out that he actually got credit two weeks later at this same institution. So I’m
a little skeptical about all of this anecdotal evidence about credit constraints. It’s undoubtedly the
case that credit standards have tightened, but the environment is such that a lot of borrowers have
gotten genuinely weaker.
I mention all of this just because it influences how I feel about arguments that credit market
conditions make the current level of the real funds rate any less meaningful as an indicator of the
stance of monetary policy. I just don’t find those arguments convincing right now. The real funds
rate using the Greenbook’s forecast of overall inflation four quarters ahead is lower than it has been
at any time since the 1970s. In fact, this measure is about 1½ percentage points lower than the lows

August 5, 2008

69 of 145

it reached in 2003 or 1994, and I think this is to my mind a better way to measure the actual real
federal funds rate than what’s plotted in the Bluebook.
The Greenbook forecast is that core PCE inflation will rise to 2.6 percent for the second half
of this year and then gradually subside to 1¾ percent a year or so after that. This forecast is a very
risky path, I believe, because at any point along that hump, higher inflation could well become
embedded in expectations. I think getting back to price stability after this episode is going to
depend critically on the stability of inflation expectations, as many of you have noted. It is true that
TIPS compensation measures have been reasonably steady for a few months and that wage rates
show no sign of accelerating as yet. But if we wait to raise rates until wage rates accelerate or TIPS
measures spike, we will have waited too long. I think that’s very clear, and it will cost us too much
to recover our credibility.
Accordingly, I believe that the biggest policy risk we’re going to be facing in the months
ahead is the risk of waiting too long. In past episodes of economic or financial weakness, we’ve
been unwilling at times to raise the funds rate until we were almost completely certain that
economic recovery would be sustained. I do not think that we can afford that luxury at the present
time. The risk is too great that inflation expectations will ratchet up again. We need to be prepared
to raise rates even if growth is not back to potential and even if financial markets are not yet
tranquil, and we need to be prepared to raise rates even if we think that we might have to reverse
course. After all, we cut rates aggressively even though we were not certain that a recession was in
store for us and, in part, on the grounds that we could reverse course if it proved that we cut too far.
To insist on more certainty to raise rates than to reduce them would introduce a fatal asymmetry in
our reaction function.

August 5, 2008

70 of 145

Let me add a comment or two inspired by some of the discussion around the table. I want to
commend President Bullard’s discussion of systemic risk. You mentioned this earlier in your Q&A
session, Mr. Chairman. This is a notoriously slippery concept. In popular usage, it seems to mean
an episode in which one bad thing happens followed by a lot of other seemingly related bad things
happening, and as such, it’s a purely empirical notion without any content or usefulness by itself as
a guide to policy. It doesn’t say whether those other bad things are efficient—things that ought to
happen—or inefficient and preventable by suitable policy intervention. To invoke the notion of
systemic risk to support a particular policy course requires theory. I spoke about theory last night,
but it requires some theory, some coherent understanding of the way you think the world works.
The theoretical literature related to systemic risk is relatively young, and this isn’t the place to go
into it. I’ve said before that I think it would be useful for this Committee to learn more about this.
The Committee might be surprised that the literature provides only relatively tenuous rationales—I
think is a fair judgment—for policy intervention. I hope, Mr. Chairman, that the group you’ve
commissioned to study the meaning of unusual and exigent circumstances can explore this terrain in
a little more depth. Going forward, I think our deliberations would be aided if we were to strive to
put our theoretical frameworks on the table when discussing how financial markets work and what
we ought to do about them.
In case there’s any suspense, for my own money—and this is just one man’s view—I
haven’t seen a convincing case for the existence of policy-relevant market failures in the financial
markets in which we’ve intervened, apart from the usual distortions owing to the federal financial
safety net. We systematically expanded that safety net. I believe what we’ve done has been to
subsidize selected borrower classes and prop up prices of various financial assets, and I think the

August 5, 2008

71 of 145

problem we face now is the tremendous dependency of financial institutions and markets on our
credit. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me make just a few comments about the
Greenbook forecast at this point, which I found quite useful for thinking about policy going forward
only in part because it is quite close, at least in broad overview, to the forecast I submitted before
the June meeting on the economic outlook, inflation, and so forth. In any event, given the alignment
in these forecasts, I think there are several characteristics worth emphasizing. First, financial
headwinds persist—we have talked about this for quite a while—and the Greenbook now assumes
more stress and more persistence than it assumed earlier. Second, the inventory overhang in
housing persists with negative implications for activity and for prices in that sector. Third, real
growth is subdued over the next several quarters at least. Against the background of the Greenbook
forecast, growth over the balance of this year in excess of 1 percent in real terms would have to be
considered a positive surprise. Growth in excess of trend next year would have to be considered a
positive surprise. Finally, with regard to inflation, headline inflation abates after the current quarter,
although overall both headline inflation and core inflation remain above 2 percent through 2009.
I realize that there’s considerable uncertainty surrounding all of that and that not everybody
shares that assessment, but I think it’s worth emphasizing those features because we need to try to
think several months and several quarters ahead in terms of the environment in which we will be
making policy decisions. If these forecasts are at least in the ballpark—at the risk of perhaps
belaboring the obvious—it seems to me that a major message of those forecasts is that the policy
environment is likely to remain significantly challenging for several more quarters at least. I could
put that another way. It seems that evolving readings on the economy and inflation are not likely to

August 5, 2008

72 of 145

line up appreciably at all with either aspect of the dual mandate over the next several quarters.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, let me say that the Tenth District probably, on the whole,
performed a little better than the national average in the industries that we have; but in terms of job
growth, it has slowed. At the same time, we’re still adding jobs in the region, and our
unemployment rate remains relatively low compared with national measures. Although wage
pressures actually do show some elevation relative to our Beige Book survey, they have obviously
eased a bit in recent months. But it’s interesting that, as we talk and monitor the labor conditions
and we talk to some of the labor unions, there is a great understanding that they’re losing ground.
They are going to begin entering contracts at the end of this year and in the next year, and how they
approach that is extremely important because, again, they are looking and talking now about costof-living adjustments and those sorts of things, which gives me some pause. According to our
manufacturing survey, our activity actually strengthened in July, although the expectations for
future activity have diminished somewhat. Not surprisingly, manufacturers producing energy and
agriculture and in export-related markets continue to operate at relatively high levels whereas the
other areas within the District are showing some slowdown.
Let me talk just a second about oil. Although oil prices have declined, as was noted, they
are still high enough that capital spending and production remain elevated and look to remain so in
the foreseeable future. In fact, some of our industry contacts suggest that, as long as expected prices
for oil remain in the $70 to $80 range, there should continue to be a fair amount of investment in
that particular sector. As you well know from reading the Wall Street Journal, we did have the
SemGroup go bankrupt in the Tulsa area. It has had, I think, fairly confined effects. One of our

August 5, 2008

73 of 145

regional banks took some pretty heavy losses. They’re very well capitalized and did recapitalize
some of it, so they’ve not been dramatically affected by it. Local producers are in the worst bind
because they haven’t been paid for some of the oil delivered and there’s no other party to contract
with for future deliveries. So that has brought a lot of uncertainty in the local area about where to
provide some of this oil that they’re producing.
In my discussions with businesses around the District, it’s interesting that there’s a lot more
conversation about and focus on managing your price strategy in this environment. As has been
true for a while, fuel surcharges are prevalent, and firms are able to pass those along with a fair
amount of ease. In addition, businesses are reporting that materials suppliers are placing 10-day to
30-day time limits on their price quotes. Finally, most price indexes in our manufacturing survey
remain near historically high levels, and plans for future pass-throughs have actually intensified.
Turning to the national outlook, my outlook for growth has not changed materially since the
last meeting. I expect that growth will slow in the second half because of these higher energy
prices, some weakness in the labor market, and sluggish activity in some of the manufacturing
sectors. The fact is that the uncertainty regarding the economic outlook is considerable, and
downside risk to growth in the near-term future is there. These risks are being addressed, from our
perspective, by our current stance of accommodative monetary policy. So we are addressing that
uncertainty. The point I would like to make is that I’m less uncertain about the outlook for core
inflation. We have seen erosion in longer-term inflation expectations, and I believe inflation risks
have actually risen. If core inflation rises in the second half as expected, there is a real possibility
that inflation expectations will become unanchored, especially if we maintain our current
accommodative stance of policy. An expected leveling-off of food and energy prices and slack in
the economy could help moderate upward pressure on inflation, but I do not think they will be

August 5, 2008

74 of 145

enough to actually bring inflation down to an acceptable level. In fact, if we maintain the funds rate
at 2 percent, I think inflation is more likely to move higher than lower over the medium term, and
that concerns me. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like the Greenbook, our
modal forecast shows weaker real activity and slightly higher core inflation over the forecast period.
Downside risks to growth remain substantial, in my view, and have probably increased relative to
what we thought in June. Risks on the inflation front remain weighted to the upside, perhaps
somewhat less than in June, but this is hard to know with confidence. The adverse growth risks are
worse for several reasons. The labor market and labor income are weakening more quickly than
expected. Although there were some tentative signs of stabilization of housing demand in the
spring, demand seems to have fallen further since. Credit conditions are tighter and are expected to
be tighter longer, and this seems likely to produce a further deterioration in overall demand—note,
of course, the reduction in credit for autos, the rise in mortgage rates, and the more conservative
lending standards for consumer and corporate credit. Growth outside the United States seems likely
to slow further. Of course, fundamental to this dynamic, as has been true for 12 months, each shift
in perceptions that the bottom in overall economic growth is further away produces additional stress
for financial institutions and markets, adding to the intensity of prospective financial headwinds and
to concerns about downside risks to growth.
Now, the adverse tail on the inflation front remains significant. Many measures of
underlying inflation suggest a broad-based, if limited to date, acceleration in the rate of underlying
inflation. Market- and survey-based measures of long-term expectations are high. Surveys suggest
that firms are able to pass on some part of the acceleration in energy and materials costs. On the

August 5, 2008

75 of 145

more positive side, energy, commodity, and materials prices have declined significantly, principally
it seems because of expectations of slower growth in global demand. Growth is moderating
significantly around the world, and it’s going to have to moderate further in the most populous parts
of the world as central banks there get monetary policy tighter.
The growth of unit labor costs has been and is expected to be very moderate here. Profit
margins still show plenty of room to absorb cost increases, and as David reminded us, you can have
a relatively benign outlook for the path of core inflation without margins narrowing very
dramatically. Inflation expectations have not deteriorated meaningfully here, even with the flatter
expected path of monetary policy in the United States. Of course, it’s very important that inflation
expectations and pricing power moderate from current levels. If some of the downside risks to
growth materialize, this will happen, and inflation risks will moderate. If, however, the economy
continues to prove to be resilient to these downside risks, then we will face higher inflation. On
balance, the rate of growth in underlying inflation suggests that growth in demand in the United
States will have to be below potential for a longer period of time if inflation expectations are to
come down sufficiently. This means that we will have to tighten monetary policy relatively soon
compared with our previous behavior in recoveries—perhaps before we see the actual bottom in
house prices and the actual peak in unemployment.
However, at this point, the risks to real growth remain critical. In my view, we need to have
more confidence that we have substantially reduced the risks of a much sharper, more protracted
decline in growth before we begin to tighten. I think it is unlikely that we will be able or will need
to move before early next year. Short-term market expectations for monetary policy in the United
States seem about right at present. I don’t see a strong case for trying to alter those expectations in
either direction at this point. To try to pull forward the expected tightening would risk adding to the

August 5, 2008

76 of 145

downside risk to growth and magnifying the risk of a much more severe financial crisis. On the
other hand, if we avoid some of these downside risks to growth, then policy will need to tighten
more quickly, perhaps, than the expected path now priced in the markets.
The evolution of monetary policy expectations and of inflation expectations since May
illustrates how uncertain the markets are about what path of policy will be appropriate. But the
pattern of changes in both of these measures of expectations suggests that the markets believe we
will get this balance right—that we will do enough soon enough to keep underlying inflation
expectations from eroding materially. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Like others around the table, I made only small
revisions to the central tendency of my forecast going forward as a result of the developments of the
intermeeting period, maybe a slight reduction in the path of output and a quicker decline in headline
inflation owing to the oil prices. But I think more important than any shift in central tendencies is
the sense that the information tends to reinforce—to reduce the uncertainties around—the basic
contours of a projection in which the economy operates with a wider output gap and a lower
inflation rate on balance over the next 18 months or so than it has over recent quarters.
About the output gap, the incoming information strongly suggests that we are on a trajectory
that at least for some time will have the economy growing appreciably below the growth rate of its
potential. The most obvious evidence is the persistence of a soft labor market—continuing declines
in employment and no sign of near-term strengthening in the initial claims data. I agree that the
declines in employment, as several of you have pointed out, are not consistent with a recession, but
they’re certainly not consistent with the economy growing close to its potential. You need another

August 5, 2008

77 of 145

150,000 or 200,000 jobs rather than minus 60,000, which is where we are now. So I think the
economy is likely to grow below potential for some time.
Even on the spending side, the decline in consumption in June, when rebate checks were
continuing to hit bank accounts, and a further sharp drop in auto sales in July might be early signs
that households are beginning to pull back under pressure from higher energy prices, job worries,
declining house values, and reduced credit availability. To be sure, one month’s consumption data
along with auto sales, which are subject to all kinds of idiosyncratic influences, are not enough to
justify a major change in outlook. But as President Lacker noted, household spending has for some
time been a source of downside risk to the forecast. At some point, household spending could begin
to reflect attitudes, and this information at a minimum seems to underline those risks as well as to
point to sluggish growth of spending in the third quarter.
Soggy economic news has extended to our trading partners, where actual activity and
expected activity also have been marked down. The tone of news from abroad has been decidedly
downbeat, as those economies feel the effect of weaker purchases from the United States,
continuing financial strain, softening housing markets, and higher energy prices. Much as in the
United States, attitudes abroad seem weaker than the data; but the euro area did report a record
decline in retail sales in June this morning, and my sense is that our trading partners are facing
larger downside risks to growth as well as a markdown of central tendencies. The dollar hasn’t
changed much on balance for four or five months now. With a stable dollar and weaker demand
abroad, production in the United States will be getting a lot less cushion from net exports over the
next few quarters than it did in the first half of the year.
Finally, despite the downward movement in Treasury interest rates and in the expected
federal funds rate path, financial conditions for households and businesses have tightened since the

August 5, 2008

78 of 145

last FOMC meeting. Savers and intermediaries have become even more cautious amid concerns
about deepening losses spreading beyond subprime mortgages, about the safety of uninsured
deposits at regional banks, high volatility in markets, and the possible weakening of the underlying
macro situation. Lenders are hunkering down to endure a long period of rising credit problems and
great uncertainty. I don’t think we need to rely on anecdotes here. Mortgage interest rates have
actually risen on balance, as have corporate bond yields across many risk categories; and in many of
these cases, the nominal interest rates are at least as high as or in some cases much higher than they
were last August when the federal funds rate was at 5¼. Banks continue to tighten terms and
standards for nearly all categories of loans. Equity prices have fallen, adding to the downward
pressure on wealth from declining house prices, and I think these developments underscore the very
slow recovery likely in financial markets and the possible downside risks relative to even that very
gradual improvement that many of us were expecting. The tightening of conditions is damping
credit growth broadly defined and will constrain, at least to some extent, spending going forward,
delaying the return to trend or above-trend growth.
Thus although uncertainties remain quite elevated, I think we can be a little more confident
that the economy will be subject to further quarters of below-trend growth and declining resource
utilization. Furthermore, with housing prices still falling fast, inventories of homes still high, and
financial markets quite skittish, the downside risks even to a slightly lower central tendency forecast
remain high. Greater confidence that output will grow below potential for a time contributes to a
little more optimism on my part that inflation will, indeed, come down substantially over the
coming quarters. An environment of rising unemployment and declining capacity utilization is not
one in which businesses or labor will find it easy to restore real incomes or raise profit margins after
the increase in energy prices.

August 5, 2008

79 of 145

With regard to that increase in energy and other commodity prices and how it affects
headline inflation, I like to differentiate pass-through from spillover. I think we can expect passthrough. Pass-through to consumer prices of the higher energy and commodity prices is part of the
adjustment process by which demand gets damped and by which consumers realize, unfortunately,
the lower real income that they get from the adverse terms of trade. So the fact that businesses are
able to pass through higher commodity prices and higher petroleum prices I don’t find all that
worrisome, provided that they’re passing through a one-time increase in prices rather than a
continuing rise. I think we have some further evidence that at least to date—things could change, I
admit—what we are seeing is a pass-through of a one-time rise rather than some continuing
increases. For one thing, commodity prices, as shown in Bill’s chart, have flattened out or actually
declined in the past few months. So presumably that pass-through is a one-time jump, if that’s what
they’re doing, passing through those prices. Second, I think we saw in the GDP chain-type price
indexes that the price of domestic value added increased at an annual rate of only 1.1 percent in the
second quarter—which suggests to me that, at least through the second quarter, there was very little
spillover from these higher commodity and energy prices to the stuff we produce here at home.
Also, labor compensation growth, which could be a lagging indicator, at least to date hasn’t
increased. If anything, it has slowed a little further, which along with relatively robust productivity
growth is holding down unit labor costs. Headline inflation—the goods and services that people
purchase—has been high. Energy prices are being passed through, but I think to date there’s no
evidence or very little evidence that it’s spilling over into other prices in the economy. So this is
about the adjustment to relative prices. Obviously the decline in oil prices, if it holds, will be
helpful on the inflation front, both in its direct effect on headline inflation and its indirect effect on
inflation expectations. We finally have evidence of two-way risk in oil prices, and that should make

August 5, 2008

80 of 145

us more comfortable with an assumption of stable prices as a reasonable basis for forecasting.
Other recent contributors to higher price levels have also become less averse. As I mentioned, other
industrial commodity prices have leveled out or declined, and the dollar has been relatively stable in
recent months.
Although I feel a little more confident about the expectation of lower inflation going
forward, I agree that upside risks still prevail. Core inflation has ticked up. Headline inflation will
be high for some time and could threaten to spill over through increases in inflation expectations.
Oil and commodity price declines are largely an endogenous response to perceptions of weak
growth, and if those perceptions turn around, so will those prices. Longer-term inflation
expectations remain elevated by some measures and are probably less well anchored than they were
a couple of years ago, before oil and commodity prices rose so much. In sum, I see upside risks to
both the inflation gaps and the output gaps as having diminished over the intermeeting period, and
we’ll get to the implications of that for policy in the next part of the meeting.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have no material changes to report in my view
on the overall state of financial stability, growth, or inflation; but as I talked about at the last
meeting, it still is likely to be a long, hot summer, and we’re only about half over with it. I’ll talk
first about financial institutions—make maybe four or five points—and then turn quickly to the
economy and inflation.
First, on financial institutions, I think the body blow that the financial markets and the real
economy have taken because of the turmoil at the GSEs is not complete. It is easy for those of us in
Washington to forget that bill signings don’t always solve problems. I’d say, if the last thing that
happens on GSEs is that the bill was signed two weeks ago and action isn’t taken in the coming

August 5, 2008

81 of 145

weeks and months, then I would be surprised if we could get through this period without more GSE
turmoil finding its way onto the front pages. Second, in terms of financial market conditions, the
fall in oil prices and the rest of the energy complex is, indeed, good news, but it strikes me that it has
camouflaged an even tougher period for financial institutions than would otherwise be the case.
That is, financial institutions somehow look a little more resilient, but I think part of that is only
because of the negative correlation that’s developed in recent times between equity prices of
financials and oil prices. The financial institutions themselves strike me as being in worse condition
than market prices would suggest.
Third, capital raising, as we have long talked about, is essential to the fix among financial
institutions. The way I best describe capital raising over maybe the last nine months is that the first
round of capital raising, which was in November and December, was really the vanity round. This
consisted of very limited due diligence, sovereign wealth funds signing up, issuers relying upon
their vaunted global brands, and capital being raised in a matter of days. The second round
probably took us to the spring, a round that I’d call the confessional round. [Laughter] In this
round, financial institutions said, “Oh my, look at these real write-downs that I have. Look at the
need for this real capital raising, and here I’m telling you, the investors, all that I know.” But the
second and third confessions usually have less credibility than the first. The third round is the round
that we’re in the middle of, which I think of as the liquidation and recap round, likely to be the
hardest round to pull off. It is likely to force issuers of new shares or of new forms of preferred
stock to be asking of themselves and their investors the toughest choices. They have to assess the
strength and durability of their core franchises. I think that this will be happening in very real time.
So the circumstance of an investment bank that Bill mentioned at the outset I don’t think will be the
sole case of this. This liquidation and recap round is later than would be ideal from the perspective

August 5, 2008

82 of 145

of the broader economy, but it is absolutely needed. Until we see how it occurs, it’s hard for me to
be much more sanguine that the capital markets or the credit markets will be returning to anything
like normal anytime soon.
Let me make a fourth broad point about financial institutions. Because of these different
phases of capital raise, I think management credibility among financial institutions is at least as
suspect as it has ever been during this period. Even new management teams that have come in have
in some ways used up a lot of their credibility. It would be nice to believe that they have taken all
actions necessary to protect their franchises and their businesses, but most stakeholders are skeptical
that they’ve taken significant or sufficient action. At the end of the day, no matter where policy
comes out in terms of regulatory policy from the Fed and other bank regulators or accounting policy
from the SEC or FASB, it strikes me that those changes in policy are less determinative of how
things shake out. That is, management credibility is so in question that the cure is not likely to come
from accounting rules or regulators but from the markets’ believing that what management says is
what management believes and will act on it. As a result, I think that many of these financial
institutions are operating in a zero-defect world, which is posing risks to the real economy.
Fifth, let me make a final point about financials. We’ve all talked a lot about the effect of
different curves for housing prices on the financial institutions themselves. I don’t mean to give
short shrift to any of that, but I would say that the level of uncertainty and associated risks of their
non-housing-related assets are now very much a focus. According to July 2008 data, of credit
currently being extended by banks, only about 20 percent is for residential real estate. Only about 9
percent is for consumer credit. So that leaves the balance in areas where these financial institutions
and their management teams have to be asking themselves whether the weaknesses that are
emerging in the real economy will place uncertainty over assets that have nothing to do with

August 5, 2008

83 of 145

housing. That’s a major downside risk for financial institutions and has not been much of a focus of
shareholder and stakeholder concerns.
There are two open issues that will guide some of our thinking, at least with respect to these
credit markets. First, as we talked about a little last night with the presidents, are the embedded
losses so great at such a critical mass of institutions with management credibility so low that many
more than currently expected might be unable to survive? This is a question that I’m not sure I
know the answer to. Second, despite the concerns about the effect of the credit markets on the
broader economy that I talked about, our monetary policy may not be terribly well suited to be
fixing those problems, and financial institutions may not be terribly sensitive to the extent we decide
that we should change the stance of policy.
Taking all that into account, let me say a couple of words about growth and inflation. First,
on the economic growth front, given my views of what’s happening in the credit markets, it’s very
hard for me to believe that the economy will get back to potential anytime soon. There are
continued financial stresses that could last through year-end, and in there could be an upside
surprise. Still, all things considered, my base case has second-half growth still above staff estimates
owing in part to the productivity we’ve seen in recent months and the remarkable resiliency of this
economy. If we look beyond that horizon, though, toward the Greenbook forecast in 2009 and
beyond, I must say I don’t really see the inflection point to take us back to economic growth of
2.2 percent or whatever the Greenbook suggests. I think we’re going to be in this period of belowtrend growth for quite some time. My own view is that, when the Congress comes back after its
August recess, we will be in the middle of a big debate on “Son of Stimulus” and that the stimulus
probabilities have moved up quite materially. However, it is not at all obvious to me that it will do
much in terms of helping the real economy. Outside the United States, I share the view of Governor

August 5, 2008

84 of 145

Kohn, which is that I’d expect global GDP, particularly GDP among advanced foreign economies,
our major trading partners, to continue to disappoint, making the remarkable addition of net export
growth to our own GDP likely to dissipate.
Turning finally to inflation, my view is that inflation risks are very real, and I believe that
these risks are higher than growth risks. I don’t take that much comfort from the move in
commodity prices since we last met. If that trend continues, then that would certainly be good
news; but I must say I don’t feel as though inflation risks have moved down noticeably since we last
had this discussion. The staff expects food prices to continue to be challenging; that is certainly my
view. The staff also expects core import prices to fall rather precipitously. I’m a little skeptical of
that view. I think it’s possible, but I don’t really see the catalyst for that given what we see about
changes in input prices overseas and given expectations of the dollar in foreign exchange markets.
So with that, I think that the inflation risks are real, and I’ll save the balance of my remarks for the
next round. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you very much. We have now had the first anniversary of all
the financial turmoil, and how have the markets celebrated? Well, we have had Freddie and
Fannie go down and need one of the largest bailouts. We have had IndyMac go down—the
second largest bank failure in U.S. history and perhaps the most costly bank failure in U.S.
history. I am talking just in nominal terms; I haven’t actually done the real adjustments. Also,
we’ve seen a variety of widening risk spreads. At the last meeting I went on with my standard
metaphor of the slow burn and said that things could reignite, and I think we certainly have seen
a few things reignite. I very much agree with Governor Warsh with respect to Freddie Mac and
Fannie Mae that, although legislation has been passed, the devil will be in the implementation

August 5, 2008

85 of 145

details. Simply because the Treasury has the capacity to do something, it is not quite clear what
it will do or be able to do or how the markets will respond to that. Obviously, Freddie and
Fannie have been really the only game in town for mortgage securitization. The jumbo markets
have not been working. The subprime market is not there right now. So until and unless we can
be assured that they will operate properly, they still have a lot of potential for more flames
coming out.
There are also a number of other reasons that I am still concerned about financial markets
being very far from normal. One, reference was made to a study that we have done here at the
Board that Nellie Liang is taking the lead on. New York has also done a study; I think they used
very different methods but came out with similar numbers. The studies say that large losses are
still to come and that total losses associated with the challenges that we have been seeing will be
on the order of $900 billion. U.S. and European financial institutions have taken about
$400 billion of write-downs. Not all of those losses will be on financial institutions’ balance
sheets, but there certainly are potentially more losses to come—not only in mortgages, in
leveraged loans, and in commercial real estate but also in the consumer parts of the portfolio and
potentially other parts of the portfolio. A fragility is there, which has to be taken into account
when we look at capital ratios. If you simply look at reported capital ratios, they are off their
peaks of a few years ago. However, if you were to do a more-thorough mark-to-market on a lot
of different pieces of the portfolio or if you did have to liquidate—even assuming it wasn’t a
broad fire sale but just one institution that had to liquidate now and it had no further
consequences for anyone else’s expectations, which I don’t think is accurate—you would see
those capital ratios be in fact much, much thinner than they appear in an accounting sense.

August 5, 2008

86 of 145

A number of people talked about the OIS spreads and said that things seem to be at
50 basis points rather than at 10 basis points. Well, that is true not only in the U.S. dollar but
also in the euro and in sterling. If you look to the forward market, that number is increasing. It
is not staying the same. It is going up quite a bit, to about 75 basis points over a year period for
the dollar to 130 to 150 basis points in sterling and in euro. That suggests a lot more challenges
to come. So even if 50 is the new 10, it is still a major challenge going forward. That puts a lot
of pressure on banks to generate earnings to make up for the write-downs and other challenges.
In the old days, when you could finance yourself at 10 basis points, the institutions were
undertaking a lot of activities that would allow them to generate a lot of revenue, even if they
kept taking hits in certain parts of their portfolio. But when funding is at 5 times that, or 10
times that, or 15 times that, a lot of activities that once were profitable are not profitable. The
margins are much lower, and their ability to earn their way out of this is much, much more of a
challenge. I think that is going to be even truer for the European institutions. That is actually
one area in which I see it as more likely that an important shoe might drop, not just in the United
States but in a major European institution. European institutions haven’t been as active in raising
capital, and there are more constraints on their ability to raise capital, given the way rights issues
work. I think that greater challenges are going to come in the European economies and that the
ECB faces greater challenges in dealing with the increasing inflation threat that they have there
and worldwide, while being able to provide some policy accommodation.
Third, securitization markets have certainly not recovered. We have talked about that.
The infrastructure investment that will be needed for these to come back in terms of data,
contract certainty, et cetera is going to take a long, long time. It is not clear exactly how long,
but it is clear that recovery will not be right around the corner. That means continuing pressure

August 5, 2008

87 of 145

on banks’ balance sheets independent of all the other capital issues. If they just want to continue
on, they have to keep a lot of things on their balance sheets. One bright light, just in case you see
nothing positive, is that we were able to put off some very significant changes in accounting—
FAS 140 and FIN 46(R). They were on a very fast track to make changes that could have
brought literally trillions of dollars of assets back onto balance sheets and would have made it
extremely difficult for securitization markets to work. That has been significantly delayed, and I
think they will take a more balanced and measured approach. Not only has that been put off, but
also the institutions will have more time to deal with it. But this pressure is real. The Senior
Loan Officer Opinion Survey couldn’t be more crystal clear on the challenges that are there and
that are likely to continue to be there. Why is that? Well, as a number of people have
mentioned, it is because of challenges on the HELOC portfolios and on the option ARM
portfolios and uncertainty about a lot of other pieces of the portfolios. So given my views, I am
really glad that the Greenbook baseline has taken on board much more of what was previously a
“delayed recovery” alternative simulation scenario, much in line with what President Stern
mentioned.
But I continue to see that the situation is quite brittle and that small pressures potentially
can lead to large and rapid responses. The “severe financial stress” alternative simulation in the
Greenbook is certainly not my central tendency one, but I think that we can’t dismiss it too easily
because there still could be another—what I have now taken to calling, since I chair the
supervision and regulation committee—flare-up with one of my problem children. Many of you
know the problems in your Districts, but there are a lot of problems, unfortunately, in all the
Districts and around the world. I hope no one will ever hear about the problems that my children
are having, but sometimes they do come out. As Governor Warsh said, one way to try to deal

August 5, 2008

88 of 145

with those is through capital. It is becoming increasingly difficult to do that. In the old days the
accounting rules were such that you could take over an institution through so-called pooling
accounting methods, so you would not face an immediate write-down of everything to current
market values. One challenge we have with the institutions that are likely to be failing over time
is that these accounting standards are no longer available, so it is very, very difficult to use the
kinds of methods that have been used in the past by the FDIC and other regulators to avoid the
IndyMac type of problems. It is quite possible that we will be seeing more people queuing up,
and more people pulling money out of accounts, even though they are insured accounts. There
has certainly not been a generalized drain from the banking system. There has been a recent
shuffling, as President Lacker said. But it also makes a lot of institutions much, much more
vulnerable than they have been in the past.
If you look at the “severe financial stress” scenario in the Greenbook, what is interesting
about it is that it is relatively benign. For something that is severe stress, the macroeconomic
outcomes in terms of GDP and unemployment aren’t that severe because of the policy
response—taking the federal funds rate down to ¾ percent. I don’t think we can possibly do that
in the current environment. It is not that I think that inflation expectations have become
unanchored or are not contained, but I do think that our policy responses are contained precisely
because we can’t quite go there. If you look at the “inflationary spiral” scenario, it says that by
2009 the fed funds rate would have to go up to 3½ percent. I don’t think we are in that or
anywhere close to that. But if we had to respond as the Greenbook said to bring the fed funds
rate down below 1 percent, I think we would get close to that, and we would be in a very, very
difficult position.

August 5, 2008

89 of 145

We have to be very careful about inflation expectations. I think we have mixed evidence
on inflation expectations and inflation, although I am heartened that things do not seem to have
become unanchored. Some of both the market-based measures and the survey-based measures
have come down a bit, although I think, as Governor Kohn said, that the situation is much more
fragile. I don’t want to take on board too much comfort from the change in commodity prices
because we have seen temporary movements up and we have seen temporary movements down.
It is heartening, but I think we have to still be very, very careful on this issue. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin, your swan song.
[Laughter]
MR. MISHKIN. Well, I get one more chance in the policy round. That is the one I am
going to really go for. I am sure that people are waiting for it. [Laughter] My modal forecast
has not changed appreciably. Clearly, I am very concerned about the headwinds as a result of
the difficulty in recapitalizing financial institutions, which Governor Warsh talked a lot about.
As a result, I think that we are going to have subpotential growth for quite a period of time.
However, the bigger concern is that I see downside risks as having risen substantially. So
let me first talk about the things that are the less worrisome downside risks. I think there are
increased downside risks just on the real side of the economy. In particular, the consumer has
been very resilient, but I am not as sure that that will be true in the future. We just saw terrible
auto sales. It could be just one month, and it could bounce back up. But it could be a precursor
to much bigger problems, which would not be completely surprising given some of the other
things going on with housing prices and credit restrictions. That is one downside risk. The
second is that European growth may have shifted down, and so the kind of problems that we are

August 5, 2008

90 of 145

experiencing here perhaps are being experienced there, particularly in terms of lower housing
prices in some parts of the euro zone. That could mean less demand for our exports, and it
would be another negative for economic activity. The third is that we have actually seen a
backup in mortgage rates, and that can have a direct effect on housing demand. It is pretty grim
when you look at what is going on in terms of housing starts, but it could get worse. It can’t go
below zero, but it could get worse.
So if that were all there was, I would say that there may be a little increase in downside
risk, but it wouldn’t frighten me. But I really am very worried about the potential downside risks
in the financial sector. I have to disagree very strenuously with the view that, because you have
been in a “financial stress” situation for a period of time, there is no potential for systemic risk.
In fact, I would argue that the opposite can be the case. Just as a reminder, remember that in the
Great Depression, when—I can’t use the expression because it would be in the transcripts, but
you know what I’m thinking—something hit the fan, [laughter] it actually occurred close to a
year after the initial negative shock. In this particular environment, we have to think about
where we started. We were very lucky that this financial disruption occurred when bank balance
sheets actually were in very good shape initially. You know, thank our lucky stars that it
happened at that point.
We are now a year into this. Bank balance sheets do not look very good, for all the
reasons that we have been discussing. In fact, they look pretty grim. We have had some failures,
and we are concerned about other failures. So we have a very different environment. In that
situation, if a shoe drops—and we have had big shoes dropping; we had Bear Stearns, we had the
GSEs, and we had smaller cases like IndyMac—and if financial systems are in a very weakened
state, really bad things could happen. I think that there really is a serious danger here. In

August 5, 2008

91 of 145

particular, we could have a dynamic through a decline in demand for housing because of the
backup in mortgage rates or other reasons lowering housing prices and that spilling over into the
financial system in terms of raising credit spreads, which then lowers demand, and we could get
a nasty, vicious spiral. It is exactly one of these adverse feedback loops that we are all concerned
about. So this is not off the table, and it very much worries me. I will talk about the implications
of that for policy later.
On the inflation front, although I definitely see upside risks, I think they may have
diminished just a smidgen. There is a question about how large those upside risks are. In terms
of my thinking about what drives the inflation process, it is expectations about future output gaps
and expectations about inflation over a long period, not a short-term period. I see absolutely no
evidence that, in the last couple of months, we have had deterioration in long-term inflation
expectations. If anything, they have gotten a little better since March. If you look at the
numbers—and Bill had it in his picture—basically there was some ratcheting up when the crisis
first hit. I would argue a lot of that had to do with inflation risk, because there really was
increasing inflation risk. There has been a slight movement up—maybe a tenth, maybe you
could say two-tenths—in expectations when you look at forecasters.
I am very skeptical of consumer surveys because, exactly what behavioral economics
tells us, there is framing. If headline inflation is high, short-term inflation expectations go up,
which should happen, but long-term inflation expectations also go up. When headline goes
down, then they will come down. There was a nice little article from the San Francisco Fed in
one of those little letter deals on exactly this issue, which came up with exactly this conclusion. I
recommend that you read it; and the good news is that it takes only four minutes to read because
the articles are meant to be very short. So I really do not see that there has been deterioration,

August 5, 2008

92 of 145

and—I think that this is very important—it is why I stressed the issue of the analytic framework
for thinking about the inflation process and what monetary policy can do. We can’t control
relative prices, but we can do something about long-run inflation expectations and expectations
about future output gaps.
So I haven’t seen a problem lately that there has been deterioration in long-run
expectations. What about output gaps? Well, if anything, they look as though they are expected
to widen maybe a smidgen, not that much. We don’t have any indication to expect that we will
be overshooting in terms of having output greater than potential. Again, that should not be
raising inflation. It should, if anything, maybe lower it a bit. Finally, of course, oil prices are
lower. I don’t think that means that they will stay low because the volatility is huge; but at least
the fear that they are going to keep on going up and up and up—so it would not be a one-shot
change but would be put into long-run inflation—has, I think, diminished somewhat.
So where do I stand in terms of the upside risk? There still is upside risk because having
high headline inflation does have the potential to spill over into inflation expectations. All of us
have that concern. But I want to emphasize very strongly that it has not happened yet; I think
that is very important. I also think it is very important to monitor this. One concern that
members of the Committee have is that we wouldn’t react fast enough because we have
sometimes been inertial in the past. That is a serious concern. But I think there is a strong
argument that, when you have very big downside risks to economic activity, you want to deal
with inflation expectations when they actually indicate that there is some problem. And I just do
not see that at this juncture. Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Duke.

August 5, 2008

93 of 145

MS. DUKE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I was advised to speak of things I know, so all
of my comments will have to do with commercial banks and the traditional banking operations
within those banks. Also, they are limited to the market area that I operated in. I was in a large
community bank. The primary competitors were 2 of the top 5 banks and 4 of the top 20 banks.
I hope to expand that on the supervision committee.
I guess the major observation I would have is that I can’t see lending growth ever
resuming until the market for financial stocks improves. That market is not going to improve
until it is clear that the credit risk is manageable. I haven’t seen the confidence in banking and
banking institutions this low since we were well into the S&L crisis back in the early 1990s. At
the same time, the credit numbers—or at least the commercial banks’ part of the credit
numbers—don’t look all that bad. At this point, we are sharing those credit losses with a number
of other types of institutions, and I think the banks got the better slice of that pie. So I do believe
that the banks will be able to manage through this.
On the equity side of things, you have had equity destroyed through credit losses, and so
those banks are certainly reducing their lending. I don’t think there is enough capital in the
system. I don’t think earnings are strong enough. There is certainly no external capital available
to pick up that slack. So while you hear smaller banks say, “We are getting great business now
because the larger banks have cut back on their lending,” they just don’t have the capacity to take
in that business. No matter why they are trying to raise capital, capital issuance is viewed as a
sign of weakness. It is scarce. It is expensive. The short selling has been just amazing. It has
really driven down the prices. For some of the larger banks, it is running anywhere from 10 to
15 percent of total float. It has even gotten down into banks smaller than $5 billion. I was
looking at one, and the short interest on July 15 was 10 times that of April 15. It was running

August 5, 2008

94 of 145

about 7 percent of float on a very thinly traded stock. I can’t believe that it has anything to do
with the fundamentals of the institution. It is just all being painted with the same brush.
For institutions that must raise capital or fail, my concern is that the capital that is being
raised or being offered comes with an exit strategy. I don’t think that the capital is going to have
the patience to wait for a longer-term resumption of lending. Those that do have capital cushions
seem to be spending them on small buybacks or dividend increases in an effort to demonstrate
some confidence in the future.
On the liquidity side, central core funding is very tight and incredibly uncertain. CD
rates do remain high, and as one institution after another desperately needs money, they raise the
rates. As one falls out of that situation, somebody else picks it up again. After the full weekend
of IndyMac coverage in the press, the phones just lit up everywhere asking about FDIC
insurance. Now there is a renewed interest in the CDARS program. I didn’t realize that these
deposits are classified as brokered deposits. It will be interesting to see if we have a big jump in
brokered deposits in the next couple of quarters. The Home Loan Banks are tightening their
collateral requirements. They are introducing risk rating systems, so that source of funding is not
as available as it was. Nonconforming mortgages are impossible to place.
On the asset side, I talked to several correspondent bankers, and they have been told to
cut their overall fed funds lines sometimes in half. It doesn’t matter who it is, just cut them in
half. A number of the banks are cutting home equity lines across the board and freezing those
lines. The full-relationship lending is prized, but even in that it is only to the extent that lending
is in some ways self funding. Transaction deals are like hot potatoes; nobody wants to touch
them.

August 5, 2008

95 of 145

We had some calls from other bankers who were asking what liquidity premium we were
adding to our pricing, so there is clearly a change in the pricing, which may actually improve
profitability. However, I think a lot of it is in order not to turn down the credit but simply to
price out the credit, so that the borrower makes the decision not to borrow rather than the bank
making the decision not to lend.
On the credit side, the reserve additions have been incredibly dramatic, but a lot of that is
because reserve levels were so low going into this. Capital was strong, earnings were strong, but
reserve levels were down at 70 or 80 basis points. I had not ever seen them below 1 percent until
two or three years ago. That is because of the change in the accounting for reserves as well as 10
years of no demonstrable losses. Oddly enough, the charge-off and delinquency rates really
don’t look all that bad. When I looked at first-quarter rates, they didn’t look a whole lot different
from what used to be the norm, at least in terms of commercial loans. Then, on the consumer
side, in this case it was mortgage loans versus consumer loans, but still a 75 basis point loss on
consumer loans historically was actually normal.
It is really difficult to follow any discussion of what is going on in terms of credit losses
because you get confused between what is mark-to-market loss, what is actual credit loss, what
are charge-offs, what are reserves, and then who owns those losses. I am not quite sure what the
rate of deterioration or the rate of resolution is. In terms of collection, it takes an awful lot of
time to ramp up collection and recovery efforts, and I don’t know where we are in that cycle, but
I think we have a long way to go.
The last cycle was all about commercial real estate, and nobody could work up much
sympathy for commercial real estate developers. [Laughter] In this situation, there is so much
political sensitivity around foreclosures that I think it is going to be much elongated. When a

August 5, 2008

96 of 145

borrower cannot or will not pay and you can’t restructure it to create capacity or willingness to
pay, then some form of forced sale is the only thing that gets you off go. I think that has been
pushed out and pushed out. It is also the only way to clear any junior liens. This process is
expensive and time-consuming, and owning the property is even more expensive. So as the
lender-owned properties become a larger and larger segment of the properties for sale, I do think
price declines are going to accelerate significantly.
I will be watching the IndyMac resolution particularly closely. In the last cycle, if you
will remember, the properties that were sold by the RTC brought the biggest discounts of all. So
it will be interesting to see what this theory of holding off on foreclosures and then at some later
point having to move the assets actually does to prices. The good news is that once lenders start
selling, they do tend to move units at whatever price it takes. Lenders are going to have to do
that. There is no justification for wasting precious capital or liquidity on dead assets. But there
is also no justification for selling the portfolios at fire sale prices if the net realizable value of
collecting them is higher, and I think it definitely is for the banks.
Finally, if I could take one more minute, I did do some very in-depth personal research on
the housing decisions of a relocating worker. [Laughter] I purchased a residence in January ’06
for a May ’06 closing and hit the peak. The current value, I am told, is 80 to 85 percent of the
purchase price, marketing time 6 to 12 months. The purchase in the new location—I did do the
calculation—it was 15 to 20 times annual rent, but that didn’t matter. I had already had all the
thrill of ownership that I could stand and will be renting. [Laughter] The second thing is that, if
I had financed this property at 80 percent, I would have had no equity to roll into a new purchase
anyway, so there would have been no decision involved. The good news is that as long as there
is no need to sell, the price doesn’t matter, and I could have waited it out very easily. So the

August 5, 2008

97 of 145

conclusion that I came to is that this current elevated inventory we have of housing includes only
those who absolutely have to sell because nobody in this market would choose to sell. So once
that begins to turn around, again, there just have to be a whole lot of pent-up houses for sale.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Michelle, what time is our hard cutoff here?
MS. SMITH. We can be pretty flexible. We’re okay.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You want it before 2:15, though. All right. Well, I spent a
lot of time through the meeting and during the break working up a crystalline summary of the
discussion. [Laughter] But I am a bit concerned about getting to lunch and avoiding the 2:15
hard deadline; so if you would excuse me, this time I will just go directly to a few comments of
my own, and then we can go to the policy round.
We saw growth of about 2 percent in the second quarter, which suggests a campaign
slogan for the Republicans, “The Economy: It Could Be Worse.” [Laughter] The question,
though, is whether this higher-than-expected growth rate in the second quarter implies that we
are actually looking forward to a better-than-expected remainder of the year or whether this was
in some sense a last hurrah of borrowing from the future. I feel that I am very strongly in the
latter camp, unfortunately. I do think that, for reasons people have talked about, the remainder of
the year and into next year are likely to be quite weak. I don’t know how weak, but if you look
at each component of spending or component of production, you see mostly very negative
indicators.
We have talked about consumption. We know about all the fundamental issues that are
affecting consumers, and we have seen recently, I think both anecdotally and in terms of the
data, some softness, particularly in the auto area. In the labor market, several people have noted

August 5, 2008

98 of 145

that the loss of payroll jobs has not been as rapid as, for example, in 2001. The unemployment
rate, though, has risen as quickly as in previous episodes, and any look at the unemployment rate
would suggest that this is something close to a normal recession dynamic.
Housing, of course, remains very uncertain. We don’t really know when the bottom will
be, although I would add, a point that I think Bill Dudley made, that there seems to be a growing
confidence that when we have reached the bottom in housing, whenever that may be, we will see
a very quick improvement, both in the financial markets and then, presumably, in the economy
as well. In other areas, such as nonresidential construction, architectural billings and other
factors suggest slowing there. We see slowing in the other industrial countries, although some
strength is still in the emerging markets. So just looking at the traditional indicators of growth
and production, I think the best guess is for a slow second half, a slow beginning of 2009, and an
unemployment rate that continues to rise from here.
I do believe that the financial stress and its implications for credit availability are
important in this whole dynamic. I guess President Lacker and I keep talking past each other,
but I don’t think that the federal funds rate is an adequate description of the stance of monetary
policy. To give another example, in the past we have used money growth as an indicator of
monetary policy. If we used that indicator, it would look quite different. I think the appropriate
indicators are the rates and terms that are being faced by the people making decisions to spend in
the economy. You can go through the entire list, and in every case, as Governor Kohn
suggested, the actual rates being faced in the data by borrowers are as high as or higher than they
were last summer. Mortgages, which are a particularly sensitive area, are of course critical here.
Despite the decline in the federal funds rate, the spread between mortgage-backed securities and
duration-matched Treasuries is now about 260 basis points compared with 120 basis points last

August 5, 2008

99 of 145

summer. In addition, for the spread between jumbo loans and conforming loans, which in the
past has normally been between 25 and 50 basis points, the offer rate is about 120 basis points.
So there seems little doubt—and we can check with Governor Duke about this—that, despite the
lower rate on overnight bank lending, the rates that matter for economic activity are largely
higher than they were a year ago. Therefore, I don’t think it is evident at all that we are in a
financial situation that is conducive to rapid, excessive growth and inflationary increases a priori.
Now, going forward, of course, a lot of what happens in the economy is going to depend
on bank balance sheets. I won’t spend much time. In April, I talked about the staff’s estimates
of losses going forward. That has been updated. Nellie Liang is working with people in New
York. The numbers are not too encouraging under the baseline scenario, forgetting about the
more severe scenarios. The staff now projects about $228 billion in losses for U.S. banks and
thrifts in ’08 and ’09. That excludes investment banks. That excludes write-downs. If that
occurs, it would be about a 2 percent loss rate over the next two years, which would be above the
peak of 1991 and 1992. Of course, if the economy does worse, it would be even higher.
Relative to that $228 billion in losses, there are so far loan-loss provisions of about $68 billion.
So it looks as though we still have a long way to go in terms of bank losses and write-downs.
In addition, some of the biggest banks will take very significant hits. This is very
preliminary, and I don’t want to make too much of it, but the preliminary analysis shows that for
five of the very biggest banks, under a baseline scenario and looking at the composition of their
asset holdings, their current tier 1 capital ratios will be reduced between 30 percent and
50 percent over the next two years. So there is a real concern about the availability of credit and
about the cost of credit. I could go on and talk about a variety of other areas, including the
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey, which suggests that credit will be a concern going forward.

August 5, 2008

100 of 145

President Lacker and I have, I hope, respect—I respect him, and I hope he respects me.
But we disagree also about President Bullard on systemic risk. I take his criticism to be that it
works in practice, but can it work in theory? Systemic risk is an old phenomenon. There are
literally dozens and dozens of historical episodes that are suggestive of that phenomenon. There
is also an enormous theoretical literature. Maybe it is not entirely satisfactory, but certainly
many people have thought about that issue. I, myself, have obviously worked in this area.
Clearly, it is not something that we can tightly explain in all aspects, but I do think it is a
concern. We need to remain concerned about it. Although it is true, as President Bullard points
out, that there is an accommodation and a basis for anticipating crises as we go forward, it is also
the case, as I think Governor Mishkin noted, that after a year we are also facing a situation of
greater fragility, of much lower capital, and fewer shock absorbers. Those things will make any
crisis that much more severe, should it occur. So overall I think there is still significant
downside risk to growth. I think the baseline of slow growth is right. I am hopeful that we will
see growth restored early next year, but I think it is very uncertain at this point.
On inflation, I do have concerns, as everyone else does. I think that the commodity price
movements we have seen are good news. They have been quite significant. Besides oil prices
down about 10 percent and natural gas prices down about 32 percent, since the last meeting corn
is off 27 percent; soybeans, 17 percent; and wheat, 16 percent. Those are not small changes.
Now, obviously, the level of prices is still very high. It has risen considerably over the past year.
We will continue to see that high level of prices being passed through into the core, as Governor
Kohn noted, but I would argue that if—and this is a very big “if”—commodity prices do begin to
stabilize within the general range of what we see now, I think that the inflation concerns will
moderate over time because they will have lost essentially their driving force. We don’t really

August 5, 2008

101 of 145

have the conditions to turn the commodity price increases into persistent inflation, absent
continued pressure on that front and absent changes in inflation expectations, of which there is
only limited evidence at this point. So I want to be very clear: I think that containing inflation is
enormously important, and I think it is our first responsibility. We need to watch this very
carefully. I think there will be continued pressures even if commodity prices don’t rise, but I do
think there is also a chance that we will see a moderation of this problem going forward.
What else? I guess there has been a lot of discussion about the appropriate withdrawal of
stimulus. Again, I don’t think I accept the idea that we are currently in an extremely stimulative
situation. However, if financial markets were to normalize, for example, that would lead to a
more stimulative situation. I would like to say just a word about that. That is to say that the
speed at which we remove the accommodation—and I think it is clear we do have to do that
relatively soon—should depend to some extent on how inflation evolves. Under the more benign
scenario that I have just described—if inflation does decline significantly because of commodity
prices—I think that we obviously have more time. I would just note for comparison past
episodes. In 1994, for example, the pause lasted 17 months, and the first increase in rates came
two years after payrolls began growing again. In 2001, again, it was more than a year after
unemployment rates started coming down, and payrolls began growing before the rates started
going up.
Now, I think there is a view, which is a reasonable one, that maybe in at least the second
of those two episodes we waited too long to begin to normalize. That is entirely possible. But,
again, it would be extraordinary if we were to begin raising rates without an immediate inflation
problem with the economy still in a declining or extremely weakened situation. If inflation does
in fact become the problem that many around the table think it is, particularly if commodity

August 5, 2008

102 of 145

prices begin to go up again or if the dollar begins to weaken, then I will be the first here to
support responding to that. I do think it is incredibly important to keep inflation expectations
well anchored, particularly to the extent that movements of commodity prices and the dollar
seem to be derived from monetary policy as opposed to things like geopolitical risk. Then, I
think we can’t treat them as truly exogenous. We would have to respond to those things. So I
welcome the ongoing discussion we should have about the pace of withdrawal of
accommodation. I do think it depends very much on how things evolve, and I do think that our
strategy should be to watch carefully and to make the right decisions as we see the data come in.
Let me stop there and turn to the last round and ask Brian, please, to introduce the policy
discussion.
MR. MADIGAN. 2 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. If you prefer, in the interest of
time, I can cut back my remarks to focus just on the policy statement and not the
general background. I will be referring to the version of table 1 included in the
package labeled “Material for FOMC Briefing on Monetary Policy Alternatives.”
This version incorporates some small revisions from the draft that was included in the
August Bluebook. The table presents two policy alternatives. Under alternative B,
the Committee would maintain its current policy stance at this meeting but in its
statement would underscore its concerns about inflation. Under alternative C, the
Committee would firm policy 25 basis points today and issue a statement indicating
that the action was taken to better balance the risks to growth and inflation; the
statement would be noncommittal about whether further rate increases were
imminent.
The language proposed for paragraph 2 of alternative B has been modified a little
from that proposed in the Bluebook. Most important, the first clause is now in the
past tense, referring to economic growth in the second quarter, thus avoiding an
implication that the economy is continuing to expand in the current quarter. In a
change relative to the June statement, exports as well as consumer spending are cited
as factors that supported growth. Also, the sentence beginning with “over time” has
been moved up from the risk assessment paragraph. That shift is likely to be seen as
underscoring a view that policy is currently positioned to foster a gradual resumption
of moderate economic growth, suggesting that further easing is not likely to be
forthcoming. That sense may also be reinforced by the omission of the phrase “to
date” after “easing of monetary policy.” In paragraph 3, the inflation discussion for
alternative B gives slightly greater emphasis than in June to the Committee’s inflation
2

The materials used by Mr. Madigan are appended to this transcript (appendix 2).

August 5, 2008

103 of 145

concerns, partly by starting with the flat statement that “inflation has been high” and
by giving less prominence to the expectation that inflation will moderate. The slight
change to the final clause in paragraph 3 is proposed for purely stylistic reasons. In
paragraph 4, the first sentence of the risk assessment states that “although downside
risks to growth remain, the upside risks to inflation are also of significant concern to
the Committee.” While this sentence does not provide any explicit weighting of the
two risks and does not suggest that policy firming is imminent, the statement as a
whole probably would be read as giving a bit more emphasis to inflation concerns and
a bit less to growth concerns than market participants now expect. Thus, even though
the absence of a rate action today would be consistent with market expectations, the
statement would likely be viewed by market participants as a bit more hawkish than
they anticipated, and market rates could rise modestly in response.
Turning to alternative C, concerns about upside risks to inflation could motivate
the Committee to begin firming the stance of monetary policy at this meeting. The
first three sentences of alternative C, paragraph 2, are identical to those of alternative
B. However, the final sentence differs, partly by indicating explicitly that the
Committee sees the current stance of monetary policy as accommodative. Also, by
dropping the phrase “over time,” which appeared in paragraph 4 of the June version,
the Committee would suggest that it sees moderate economic growth as resuming
sooner rather than later. In paragraph 3, the Committee would still note that inflation
is expected to moderate but, in the last sentence of the paragraph, it would explicitly
cite the risk—and note its concern—that inflation might not fall as expected. Finally,
the risk assessment, paragraph 4, would indicate that the Committee firmed policy
today in order to better balance the upside risks to inflation and the downside risks to
growth. However, the statement would avoid an explicit judgment about whether the
risks were now balanced and would provide little information about whether further
tightening was imminent.
Even though the wording of the statement for alternative C would not indicate
that policy was now on a steady firming march, market participants would likely
conclude that the firming process had been accelerated considerably relative to their
expectations. With the Committee having tightened amid bad news about financial
institutions and in the immediate wake of the implementation of a number of
additional Federal Reserve liquidity initiatives, investors would likely conclude that
the Committee did not see financial stability considerations as raising a barrier to
further policy tightening. They would view the Committee as adopting a more
aggressive posture toward inflation. Because it has been historically rare for the
Federal Reserve to implement a one-off tightening, investors would likely see fairly
steady rate hikes over the course of future meetings, and thus short- and intermediateterm interest rates would, in all likelihood, move up sharply after this action. Yields
on longer-term fixed-rate mortgages might rise particularly substantially, as
premiums for interest rate and prepayment uncertainty increased and as mortgage
investors hedged the increase in mortgage durations. Such a development could
adversely affect the prices of financial assets that are closely tied to housing markets
and mortgage performance. However, yields on long-term Treasuries could decline,

August 5, 2008

104 of 145

particularly if market participants marked down their expectations for economic
growth and inflation.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Any questions for Brian? President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. In terms of the wording in paragraph 3, if we do not raise rates, I am
wondering why the second sentence that is now in alternative C wouldn’t be more appropriate
for alternative B, and I am wondering what your thinking is about that. In other words, if we
don’t take action, that seems to be a more emphatic statement than what you have currently,
assuming no change in rate—“The Committee expects inflation to moderate later this year and
next year,” et cetera—whereas if we are trying to send a signal that we are really concerned and
we do not change rates, why wouldn’t we have used, “Although the Committee expects inflation
to moderate . . . the possibility that inflation may fail to decline as anticipated is of significant
concern”? Then, maybe take the word “also” out of the fourth paragraph. It just seems to me
odd that if we act and describe the risk after acting, the language is even stronger. Whereas if we
don’t act and we want to emphasize that we are remaining vigilant, why wouldn’t we use that
stronger language? I am curious as to why you chose the two or what you feel the tradeoff is
there.
MR. MADIGAN. I would say, President Fisher, that the substitution that you are
suggesting seems plausible to me, but I would also say that the first sentence of alternative B
already does suggest some pretty significant concerns about inflation.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Any other questions? Let me start, then, with
President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I favor alternative A—no change in the funds
rate and a balanced assessment of risks designed to leave market expectations concerning the
path of the funds rate roughly unchanged. Oops, I made a mistake, there is no A. [Laughter] So

August 5, 2008

105 of 145

I propose to create it by changing the wording of the first sentence of alternative B, paragraph 4,
to read, “Both downside risks to growth and upside risks to inflation are of significant concern to
the Committee.” As it is currently worded, B(4) downplays the downside risks to growth, which
have intensified since our last meeting as the credit crunch has worsened and emphasizes
inflation risks, which have moderated slightly as oil prices have fallen. The assessment of risks
in alternative B, as it stands, is unbalanced and—as Brian just pointed out and the Bluebook does
also—is more hawkish than the primary dealers and most market participants generally expect.
So it is likely to shift the fed funds futures path and other interest rates upward.
I see no case, at this juncture, for signaling that we are likely to adjust policy upward
before the end of the year. Indeed, there is a non-negligible probability, to my mind, that the
next move will be down and not up. There is already significant slack in the labor market, and
with the economy expected to grow at a near-recessionary pace in the latter half of this year, the
unemployment rate is poised to rise further. This growing slack is working to contain
inflationary pressures as evidenced by the stability and low level of wage growth. I expect that
growing slack will continue holding down wage inflation going forward. Long-term inflation
expectations seem relatively well contained, and core inflation has been stable for the past
several years. Finally, a major component of the surge in headline inflation—oil price
increases—has finally started to show some sign of reversing direction. Although the real funds
rate remains quite accommodative by the usual metrics, we are clearly not in a business-as-usual
situation. We are in the midst of a serious credit crunch that has, again, worsened during the
intermeeting period, as exemplified by the developments at Freddie and Fannie and the other
things that many of you have pointed to in our last round. We are likely seeing only the start of
what will be a series of bank failures that could make matters much worse. Given these financial

August 5, 2008

106 of 145

headwinds, it is not clear to me that we are accommodative at all; I agree, Mr. Chairman, with
the comments you just made on this matter.
Given my preference for an inflation target of around 1¾ percent and equal welfare
weights on the inflation and unemployment gaps, I view the Greenbook policy path and forecast
as a roughly optimal trajectory to the attainment of our goals. Although core inflation exceeds
the level I consider consistent with price stability, unemployment also exceeds the level
consistent with full employment. Given our dual mandate and a forecast that envisions a
growing unemployment gap, coupled with declining inflation under the Greenbook funds rate
path, I see no case for jolting expectations in such a way as to, in effect, tighten policy now. I
feel especially strongly about this in view of the major downside risks to the economy from an
intensifying credit crunch.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. A funny thing happened at my board meeting
the other week. I was all set to prepare them not for a rate change recommendation this time but
for one in the not-too-distant future. By the time I was done, they were asking what the
procedure was for dissenting from my recommendation. So, in fact, they forwarded a
recommendation for an increase this time around.
You know, we can disagree over the inflationary consequences of a lot of this, but I think
there is a message from around the table and the public, our directors, and whatnot, that they do
feel that there is a concern about inflation. So I favor alternative C, although I recognize the
reality of today. I am struggling with the fact that we lowered the funds rate rather aggressively,
and things have worked out much better than we expected against the risks that we thought that
we were facing. We could disagree over that as well. I do take the point that uncertainty is very

August 5, 2008

107 of 145

high at the moment. But I think that we will need to increase rates sooner than currently
expected by markets. We are counting on a modest degree of slack and our credibility with the
public to keep inflation and inflation expectations contained while we leave rates on hold. But I
am concerned that there will be only modest inflationary restraint from the slack that we see and
that we may not be able to convince the public that they shouldn’t worry about high headline
inflation.
I certainly agree that bank balance sheets were pretty good in 2007, but I am concerned
that headline inflation has been above core inflation for quite a long time. I am not sure our own
balance sheets would reflect that. So by following a wait-and-see strategy, we are accepting a
large baseline inflation risk. In addition, there is an enormous tail risk—that is, a return to much
higher underlying inflation. Also, I was a little concerned to see in the dealer feedback to the
TAF extensions that some market participants think that we will not increase the policy rate as
long as we keep the “unusual and exigent” determination in place. I am not sure that is a good
expectation for them to have. Fundamentally, it is my opinion that there has been a change in the
balance of the economic rationale and risk-management calculus that we used to lower the funds
rate to 2 percent. It is not a huge change, but I think there has been a change. One year on, the
economy has withstood the financial shock in a resilient fashion, especially given the add-on
shock from oil. I don’t know what more we could have hoped for from the vantage point of the
fall of 2007 and the losses that have been taken.
I think the odds of preventable negative feedback loops that we took out the last 75 basis
points of insurance against are somewhat smaller than they were five to six months ago. Part of
our earlier logic to appropriately lower rates to a decidedly accommodative policy stance was to
guard against disorderly market conditions that might permanently damage our financial market

August 5, 2008

108 of 145

infrastructure and destroy the financial capital stock in a real, productive sense the way that I
think President Plosser was alluding to. But real forces have unmasked dramatic weaknesses and
faults in our financial system, and markets will be evolving to a new intermediation structure.
Our policy can ease transitions only to a degree, but it cannot restore the previous financial status
quo, nor should it be aimed at doing so.
During the transition, I would not be surprised if we revisit periods of market volatility as
the disadvantaged players are repeatedly challenged to restructure to the new environment.
Counterparties are shying away from previous financial partners, in part because of uncertainty
over the risk–return profiles and the transitioning industry structure. These profiles involve both
liquidity risk and credit risk. I think our lending facilities allow a modest decoupling of the fed
funds rate setting to deal with this. In my view, the balancing of current risks calls for increasing
the funds rate in the range of 50, maybe 75, basis points within some reasonably short period of
time. If events change importantly, I would certainly advocate further adjustments in either
direction, depending on how those risks adjust. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I would just note on the “unusual and exigent”
issue that there are two schools of thought. The other school is the one you said, which is that
having done this, we would have the freedom to raise rates; so I think it sort of cuts both
directions. President Lockhart.
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the interest of time, I will be very
brief. I support alternative B in substance and concur with its wording. I think we are in a
delicate rhetorical balancing act at this stage, and as Brian described, the slightly greater
emphasis on inflation is appropriate at this time. I think alternative B has substantially captured
the current situations and concerns of the majority of the Committee, so I support alternative B.

August 5, 2008

109 of 145

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the fact that reasonable people
may differ, and I do differ. In saying that, I am not advocating a tight monetary policy. I am
advocating a less accommodative monetary policy. I recognize Governor Kohn’s point that
relative prices are adjusting, and others have made that point. I think around that context is the
fact that we are seeing a systematic increase in the price indexes, both total and core, and I don’t
think we should ignore that. Now, the core is creeping up, but up nevertheless, and it is
systematic in my view. I would feel more comfortable that it was transitory if policy were not so
accommodative, which affirms the likelihood of further increases in inflation going forward.
That is really where I am focused, I guess is the way to say it.
We introduced the policy that we have, as I think others mentioned, as an insurance
policy early on, when we were more in an immediate crisis. I don’t negate or minimize the
tension that we are under, but I do think we have become very accommodative in our policy with
negative real rates. So here we are with this insurance. We have this subpar growth. The subpar
growth is not going to go away soon, so we are delaying removing the insurance policy. I worry
about that. I think in the long run that does increase the risk of an inflationary problem of a
sizable magnitude later on. I know we have this immediate problem, but our role also is to take a
long-run view, and I think we would be wise to raise the rate now modestly. It would still be an
easy policy. The effects of that increase might be disturbing to the markets. On the other hand,
it might actually give more confidence to the markets that inflation is going to come down
because we are going to insist that it does. I think there would be some good effects from that.
So that is where I am coming from on preferring that we move rates up slightly at this point.
Thank you.

August 5, 2008

110 of 145

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Bullard.
MR. BULLARD. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am going to make my remarks a little
shorter here. My judgment is that the current situation is a difficult one for the Committee.
Because of the very appropriate focus on financial market turmoil over the past year, our
attention has naturally turned away from keeping the level of interest rates consistent with
longer-term inflation objectives. This was done to avert particularly extreme, but low
probability, outcomes in which the economy would experience an especially severe downturn.
As it turned out, the bad state did not materialize, which I think will go down in history as a
successful element of the Committee’s policy over the past year. The ability to take on financial
market turmoil of this magnitude and prevent it from doing substantial damage to the economy—
a recession of the magnitude of 1980-82, let’s say—has been a real achievement. In that sense,
all has gone according to plan. At the same time, we have moved interest rates to a very low
level in the context of rising inflation and rising inflation expectations. A severe downturn was
unwelcome, to be sure, but it was also projected to keep inflation in check. Since that did not
materialize, we are left with low rates and an environment of CPI inflation running at 5 percent
headline, measured from one year earlier, and long-term inflation expectations creeping higher.
We face more risk now of creating a serious inflation problem than we have in a generation.
To make progress, I think we should keep rates steady today but with the plan of
preparing markets for an increase in rates at the September meeting, conditional of course on
incoming data. This would be consistent with alternative B today; and with intermeeting
statements, it would move probability mass toward higher rates through the fall and through the
first half of 2009. I have several remarks on a fall tightening campaign. First of all, moving
25 basis points is by itself not likely to have a large effect on economic activity, nor does it bring the

August 5, 2008

111 of 145

level of the federal funds rate high enough to have a meaningful effect on inflation. The FOMC
started tightening in mid-2004 but achieved a core CPI inflation rate below 2 percent in only one
month during the entire three-year period of 2005, 2006, and 2007. What the move would do is get
the Committee started on returning interest rates to a more normal level, a level more consistent
with our inflation objectives. The Committee could pause or even reverse course should
particularly adverse data suggest that economic activity was weakening substantially. Preparing for
an increase in rates means that we would be signaling that financial market turmoil is no longer the
paramount concern. On that, I think we can reasonably stress that we have provided
accommodation over the past year in the form of lower interest rates and innovative liquidity
facilities. We have bought time for financial firms to repair and adjust. While all is not as it was,
we do not want to create an inflation problem in the aftermath of a shock of this magnitude, which
may actually compound the situation and make it worse.
Longer-term inflation expectations have been creeping higher, a fact that has been widely
cited in commentary on monetary policy. I would like to stress that, in my view of a wellfunctioning inflation-targeting regime, these inflation expectations would not be moving at all.
Short-term interest rates would be moving higher and lower in response to shocks to the economy,
and inflation expectations would never move. This would reflect the confidence that the central
bank’s short-term interest rate adjustments were being accomplished in just the right way to offset
disturbances buffeting the economy. Because of this, I prefer not to interpret observed movements
in inflation expectations as evidence of what we should or should not do with respect to interest
rates. The short-term interest rate would have to move to offset the shocks to the economy even if
longer-term inflation expectations never moved. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kohn.

August 5, 2008

112 of 145

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support keeping the federal funds rate at
2 percent for now. I think that is consistent with bringing inflation down over time. I agree that
we’re going to have to tighten at some point. I agree with your analysis, Mr. Chairman—I don’t
think we have a highly accommodative policy right now. Not only would I cite the interest rates
that you cited, but I would cite the behavior of households and businesses, which aren’t acting as if
they’re looking at very low real interest rates by making purchases of durable goods, capital
equipment, et cetera. The cost of capital is not perceived to be low right now, and I think it’s for the
reasons you cited.
In my view, over the intermeeting period the inflation risks have narrowed just a bit. The
damper on inflation risk comes from the decline in oil and commodity prices, the steadiness of the
dollar, and my perception that we can count on a more negative output gap going forward, which
will provide some discipline on prices and wages. This is a difficult situation. There are no ideal
outcomes when you have this change in relative prices. We will have to live with higher inflation
and higher unemployment temporarily. We have to keep our eye on the second-round effects, not
just the pass-throughs but the spillovers, and I think so far so good. That’s a tenuous situation, I
agree, but my read of the incoming information is that we can be a little more patient than we
thought we could be six or seven weeks ago.
As for the wording of the statement, I could live with President Yellen’s rewording, but I
think that this language Brian suggested is okay as well. I’m actually not sure how the markets will
react to this. Some of the commentary I read over the last couple of weeks thought that we were
tilted toward inflation last time because of the way we worded things. I don’t think that the market
reaction will be large to this, and I agree that the first choice would be not to change market

August 5, 2008

113 of 145

expectations substantially. I think they’re aligned pretty well right now, but I think the reactions
will be small, and I can live with the alternative B wording. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I indicated in the earlier go-round, I
found the balance of risks to economic growth and inflation to be essentially the same. So other
things being equal, I might prefer to have risk assessment language that is even more balanced than
the risk assessment language that is presented in alternative B. But I have a tactical reason for
wanting to see words that express a stronger concern about inflation risk. I do, as I said earlier,
expect inflation to worsen before it improves. In particular, as we have been discussing, the core
statistics are likely to worsen notably during the next several months, and I could just shrug those
worse numbers off because I have a projection that calls for those numbers to improve by early next
year. But I’m not confident that the public will shrug them off. As we have been talking about, the
cost of longer-term inflation expectations drifting up is large. I believe that we can influence those
expectations, and I think it is important that we do let the public know that we are serious about
opening the doors to a rate increase if that becomes necessary. We need the flexibility to move
nimbly, and I think the language that is contained in alternative B puts the markets on notice. I
think alternative B enables us to hold our present strategy of watchful waiting, but it does call
somewhat greater attention to inflation risks than we expressed at the conclusion of our last meeting.
So I find both the strategy and the language of alternative B to be quite appropriate for the
circumstances we face today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I favor alternative B and the language as
displayed here. Let me say a few words about the issue of withdrawal of accommodation, which

August 5, 2008

114 of 145

I’ve been giving thought to and will want to give more thought to over time. Earlier today I talked
about the Greenbook forecast and indicated that I found it credible. But another virtue of it, even if
you don’t find it that credible, is that the cards are on the table. I mean, it has a path for the federal
funds rate. It has a path for the foreign exchange value of the dollar and so on and so forth. Two of
the key elements, as I indicated earlier, are, at least over the near-term to intermediate-term, that real
growth is subdued and that headline inflation abates after the current quarter, and I think that’s
relevant. Given the current stance of policy, I think we are well positioned for that subdued pace of
real growth. Indeed, even if we get contraction for a quarter or two, I would argue that we have
maybe not entirely but largely already addressed that.
On the inflation side, it seems to me that the key part of that forecast is the diminution of
headline inflation starting in the fourth quarter. What that means as a practical matter is that in
November, December, and January, when we get those data, we’ll get confirmation that it is either
happening or it’s not. Now, assuming that there are no major, decisive surprises between now and
then—and that may be heroic—we’ll get confirmation of whether that inflation outlook was the
accurate one. If we do, then it seems that the path of the funds rate inherent in the Greenbook looks
as though it could be acceptable. If we get disappointments on headline inflation for whatever
combination of reasons, it calls into question, at least in my mind, that path for the funds rate.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. For my part, our exchanges have in the past
been predicated on nothing but the utmost respect. I expect that to continue. If I have done
anything or said anything to contribute to any other impression, I regret it, and I apologize.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. That wasn’t my intention, President Lacker.

August 5, 2008

115 of 145

MR. LACKER. In the interest of avoiding talking past each other, let me say a bit about
why I view real rates as low. I recognize what you and Governor Kohn said about other interest
rates. But when I look at the low real rate now and at times in the past when it has been low and I
look at things like corporate borrowing rates then, they didn’t fall nearly as much as the fed funds
rate. If you plot them by lining up the NBER dates, it doesn’t look as though what’s happened now
with those borrowing rates is out of line with past experiences. So if we think now that real rates
were low in ’03, I’m led to conclude that I ought to think that they are low currently.
Another way of saying this is that spreads always go up in recessions. We drive real rates
down in recessions. If consumers and businesses were spending with frenzy now because of low
rates, to me that would be a reason that we have to raise them, get them up right away. You know,
my sense of the economics of why we push real rates low in recessions is that the state of aggregate
demand needs it. It’s exactly when consumer and business spending is sort of moribund that we
have real rates low. I’m not sure that the fact that it’s moribund tells me whether they’re low or not
relative to where they ought to be. That’s how I think about that evidence, but I look forward to
being enlightened further in the future on this.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. You raise a good point—that we ought to look empirically at
the relationship between borrowing rates and the federal funds rate in this episode and other
episodes, which we really haven’t done. So we need to do that. Thank you.
MR. LACKER. I’ll dispense with the rest of my prepared remarks and just say that I
recognize the real risks ahead of us. We’ve experienced sluggish growth, and all the downside risks
to growth that have been enumerated are very tangible and very plausible right now. I think we
should hold off raising rates at this meeting, but I’m very concerned about the inflation risks. I find
myself leaning toward a tightening campaign earlier rather than later, and I’d like to see the

August 5, 2008

116 of 145

statement do what it can to prepare markets for that. I liked the first version of alternative B, the one
without the word “also.” I think “also” damps the concern about inflation. It kind of makes it a
little too balanced for my taste. I’m also concerned—I should say “broadly”— that we seem to
have left the impression over the past several months, since the beginning of the year, that our
concerns about inflation fluctuate. I agree with President Bullard. What we ought to view as ideal
is an equilibrium where inflation expectations are rock solid and don’t change and, moreover, that
people don’t perceive our concerns and worry about inflation or the weight we’re giving in policy
deliberations as shifting from time to time. So that’s an aspect of our communications that concerns
me. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Rosengren.
MR. ROSENGREN. I support alternative B. I would actually prefer President Yellen’s
language but definitely believe that we should have the word “also” in there. Tightening at this time
would sap more strength from an already weak economy, and should the forecast look like the
“severe financial stress” scenario or the “typical recession” scenario, it would be extremely poorly
timed. If the data indicate that inflation is not ebbing as I expect and the economy is on a surer
footing than I fear, then it would be appropriate to begin what is likely to be a series of increases in
the federal funds target. But the data to date don’t indicate that, so I support alternative B.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.
MR. FISHER. Well, Mr. Chairman, I’m already out of the closet in terms of my economic
proclivities. I realize it’s awkward for some folks, but I haven’t heard enough today that would
change my view that we are running an over-accommodative monetary policy. I agree with your
point very much that the rates and the terms being faced by those who drive the economy count. As
to Governor Kohn’s point that some of these key rates have not come down, I think that has more to

August 5, 2008

117 of 145

do with risk premiums, and I hate to see it migrate toward inflation premiums, which I believe is a
significant risk. I’m obviously driven by what I hear from my contacts, although I respect the
analytics you mentioned, Governor Mishkin. My long-run thinking is as conditioned by
globalization as it is by domestic policy, and I just still have a great concern about the wage–price
spiral that’s taking place in some of our manufacturing centers in the developing countries.
I think it would be wise, just to shift my analogy here and think in canine terms, to take a
newspaper across the snout and call for a 25 basis point increase. We’re always talking about
tightening at some point. I think it just becomes increasingly difficult to take that first step. I grant
you that the economy is weak. The financial situation is brittle. That hasn’t changed in my view,
but the inflationary behavioral patterns that I’m beginning to hear about reinforce my concern about
an updrift in the core and the headline data. So I apologize, it perhaps is being a little too strong to
say that we’ve become unmoored or that maybe we are no longer anchored. I think that is
nonetheless a real perception. I’m going to vote against alternative B and for alternative C. I may
be a minority of one, but perhaps I’ll be a sea anchor, if you understand the sailing analogy here,
and assist the process of our commitment to be focused on inflation as a risk just as we focused on
downside risk to growth. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you can imagine, as we’ve discussed, this
meeting presents a difficult policy position for us—and for me in particular. I think we must pay
careful attention to the financial market volatility; and to the extent that it has consequences for the
real economy, I’m certainly sensitive to that concern. I had a similar experience with my board of
directors that President Evans did. I went into my board recommending no change and got
considerable push-back in discussion about how we dissent and what the consequences of doing

August 5, 2008

118 of 145

that are. They are concerned about inflation, and I’m concerned about our mandate to keep longerterm and intermediate-term inflation in check.
We’re unlikely, in my view, to get confirming or convincing evidence about whether
expectations have become unanchored until well after the fact. I agree there has been very little
wage–price pressure to date. But that will be the last shoe to drop in this sequence of raising
expectations, and by the time we get to that, I’m afraid it will be too late. I think in the near term we
might see some relief in headline inflation; but as has been discussed, whether that will persist is
highly dubious.
My real concern is that I believe that monetary policy is accommodative, and with all due
respect, Mr. Chairman, when I look at the data comparing the levels of borrowing rates of
consumers and businesses, both the levels in real and nominal terms and the spreads, what we see in
this period looks remarkably similar to what we’ve seen in lots of other recessionary, slow growth
periods. So, again, following the analogy that President Lacker was using, I see this period as less
atypical and more typical of what we see in slow-growth periods. I think it’s important that we
begin to prepare the markets for an impending shift to a tighter policy. I agree with President
Hoenig. The request here is not for tight policy but somewhat less accommodative policy; and if we
choose to go with no funds rate increase today, I think the language must help prepare the markets
going forward.
I’m pleased with a lot of the discussion around the table. We are actually beginning to talk,
I think, about what our exit strategy is going to be from this. I think it’s very important to have
those conversations, and I appreciate them. I, too, share the observations that President Evans had
about talking with people who say, “Well, we can’t possibly remove accommodation until we get

August 5, 2008

119 of 145

rid of the facilities.” I think that is wrong. As you said, Mr. Chairman, actually having the facilities
might make it easier for us to correct monetary policy, and I think that’s very, very important.
I guess my bottom line is that I can accept leaving the funds rate unchanged today as long as
our language is sufficiently strong about inflation. To that end, I was actually a little more
comfortable with the draft table 1. I didn’t like the addition of the word “also.” I thought that
weakened the statement. I would prefer paragraph 4 without the “also.” I also have one other,
minor observation about paragraph 3, and that’s the first sentence, which says that “inflation has
been high, spurred by the earlier increases in the prices of energy and some other commodities.”
Well, I think that’s partly true, but I’m concerned that somehow it conveys the impression that the
problem with inflation is oil and commodities, when in fact more correctly my concern about
inflation is not just oil. My concern is about the stance of policy. So I would put on the table the
possibility of saying that “inflation has been high, partly spurred by high oil and commodity prices”
to say that it’s more than just the short-term behavior of commodity prices. I think the word “also”
means that inflation concerns there are added as an afterthought, which is my reading of the change
from the draft table 1 to paragraph 4. So I prefer that “also” be eliminated. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’ll be brief. I favor alternative B as written and
presented. I think it strikes the right balance by highlighting the risks that we see on the inflation
front, and I agree with Brian’s characterization that the capital markets’ reaction might be a little
surprise. It is hard for us in a time like this to predict exactly how the capital markets are going to
interpret this, but it wouldn’t surprise me to see some initial market reaction that is ostensibly
negative. That doesn’t trouble me too much. Ideally, the removal of policy accommodation, which

August 5, 2008

120 of 145

we talked about today, would be from a position of strength not weakness, but we may or may not
have the luxury of waiting for that opportunity. Finally, I think it’s important over this period that
we not be perceived to be lurching. I think alternative B strikes the right balance of explaining our
concerns and provides us reasonable optionality—that is, as you’ve described previously, statedetermined rather than time-determined. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you. I support no change, alternative B. As I mentioned before,
I don’t want to put the commodity price decreases and energy price decreases in the bank and say
we don’t have any problems going forward. But we also can’t ignore them, and I think that does
take off a bit of the pressure. It also manifests itself in some of the survey numbers and some of the
market-based numbers in terms of expectations. So I think it allows a little more time, as someone
said earlier, to be patient, to make the determination, given that I still think there are some very real
downside risks, as I’ve mentioned.
I think this type of statement will be largely consistent with market expectations, although I
do think, and Brian can correct me, that this is one of the first times that we have made a very clear
statement such as “inflation has been high.” I think that’s a bit of a change from where we have
been. That’s a much stronger acknowledgement of the inflation situation, which I think is
appropriate to be acknowledging. But I do think that it may send a relatively strong signal to the
market, and it makes me feel more comfortable about no change today with the statement because it
shows a lot of concern about the level of inflation in actually characterizing it as high. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Mishkin.

August 5, 2008

121 of 145

MR. MISHKIN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just let me talk a little about monetary policy,
and I’ll be brief there. But then I have to use my opportunity to raise some issues for the Committee
when I’m not here. I do support alternative B. As is obvious from my earlier discussion, I believe
that the risks are balanced. I have one modification to Janet’s language because I think it is just
simpler to say that “the downside risks to growth and upside risks to inflation are of concern to the
Committee.” I don’t see the need for “both,” but we’re actually on the same wavelength in terms of
this issue.
What I’d like to spend some time on—because I feel this is sort of my swan song, but
maybe because I’m a classy guy, I’ll call this my “valedictory remarks”—are three concerns that I
have for this Committee going forward. I’m not going to be able to participate, but I have a chance
now to lay them out. The first is the real danger of focusing too much on the federal funds rate as
reflecting the stance of monetary policy. This is very dangerous. I want to talk about that. Second
is that I think it’s absolutely critical that we keep our options open in the current circumstances, and
so I want to talk about that. The third is on the communication issue, but it’s not going to be on
inflation objectives. I’ve already talked about that enough in public, so it’s clear to you one way or
the other. I hope you consider it, but that’s something that I don’t need to go into here.
First of all, let me talk about the issue of focusing too much on the federal funds rate as
indicating the stance of monetary policy. This is something that’s very dear to my heart. I have a
chapter in my textbook that deals with this whole issue and talks about the very deep mistakes that
have been made in monetary policy because of exactly that focus on the short-term interest rate as
indicating the stance of monetary policy. In particular, when you think about the stance of
monetary policy, you should look at all asset prices, which means look at all interest rates. All asset
prices have a very important effect on aggregate demand. Also you should look at credit market

August 5, 2008

122 of 145

conditions because some things are actually not reflected in market prices but are still very
important. If you don’t do that, you can make horrendous mistakes. The Great Depression is a
classic example of when they made two mistakes in looking at the policy interest rate. One is that
they didn’t understand the difference between real and nominal interest rates. That mistake I’m not
worried about here. People fully understand that. But it is an example when nominal rates went
down, but only on default-free Treasury securities; in fact, they skyrocketed on other ones. The
stance of monetary policy was incredibly tight during the Great Depression, and we had a disaster.
The Japanese made the same mistake, and I just very much hope that this Committee does not make
this mistake because I have to tell you that the situation is scary to me. I’m holding two houses right
now. I’m very nervous. [Laughter]
The second issue is that it’s absolutely critical that we keep our options open. This relates to
the points that I already made in my discussion—I argued that we don’t know where this situation
of financial stress is actually going to head and that the potential for shoes dropping and bad things
happening out there is real. I think it’s likely that it won’t happen, but it’s a significant probability
with very serious negative consequences. In that situation, we don’t know exactly the direction of
where we have to go. I was actually very pleased with President Evans’s comments. Charlie has
been a good friend for a long time, and he is one of the people I have tremendous respect for as an
economist. Although we had a disagreement in our view of monetary policy today, on the issue
going forward I was pleased to see that you actually indicated that there is a possibility—we hope it
doesn’t happen, by the way—that things go south and that we actually have to be much more
aggressive on monetary policy and on liquidity issues. I know that there have been some concerns
on the Committee about that as well, but no option should be taken off the table if bad things
happen, and we cannot get boxed in. I feel very, very strongly about that.

August 5, 2008

123 of 145

I would also say that the same issue comes up in terms of inflation. I have argued very
strenuously for nongradualism in a situation like the one we’re in. We are in a different world when
we are in a situation of financial stress, and it’s very possible that we might have to raise rates very
quickly. There’s a good news case and a bad news case. The good news case is that housing prices
stabilize. That could actually turn things around very quickly. I think, Bill, if I’m not incorrect, you
mentioned that possibility, and I think you’re absolutely right. In that kind of situation, our policy
would become very accommodative. I do not think it’s too accommodative at all right now. I think
it’s balanced; it’s appropriate. But if the financial markets improve, it will become much too
accommodative very quickly, and we then have to respond very quickly in order not to have
inflationary consequences. I’d like to see that happen, by the way.
The other case, which I would not like to see happen, is that inflation expectations get
unhinged. I have seen no evidence that long-run inflation expectations have gotten unhinged, but
there is substantial risk. If that happened, we would also have to move up very quickly. So I really
implore this Committee to keep your options open. Do not get boxed in. Let’s hope and pray—
let’s all get around in a circle and hold hands—that oil prices fall, which will also help us not get
boxed in. Don, I told you I was going to be a little colorful. He was waiting for this one. I should
mention that Don was actually at a conference where he talked about constraints on people’s
behavior as a result of the transcripts being recorded, and he said, “But not Rick.” [Laughter]
The third issue is something about which I am less constrained, which is communications. I
would not have talked about this earlier, but it really does worry me. We have a complicated
governance structure in this Committee, which I actually think is the right governance structure.
We have two types of groups that vote on this Committee. We have the people who are Presidential
appointees and then confirmed by the Senate, who are Board members, and I will soon not be one of

August 5, 2008

124 of 145

them. I’ll be a civilian again. Then we have Bank presidents, who are much more tied into the
private sector because your boards of directors, which are composed of private-sector people,
recommend you. Then we do have some role, but they’re the primary people who decide who
becomes a Bank president.
I think that’s a very good framework. It actually serves us very well. I’ve been on both
sides. I’ve been on the other side of the fence, not as a president but as an executive vice president.
It serves us very well because we have a link to the private sector that we normally would not have;
importantly, it keeps us real in terms of information; and there’s a group of people out there who are
not in Washington or New York (because people also have a hard time about New York) but who
tend to be very important supporters for us politically. So this is a system that I would very much
like to see preserved. It does have a problem because of the different roles here. What I have been
very concerned about—and I have had people in the markets speak to me about this—is that
recently I had a very prominent central bank governor say to me, “What in the hell are you guys
doing?” The issue here is that we need to have a situation where Bank presidents and also members
of the Board can speak their views. They may have different views, and I very much encourage that
in terms of discussion, of where they think the economy is going, which is what we do inside; and I
think that does need to be done outside the Committee because it shows that there are different
views, that we’re thinking about it, that we’re trying to learn from each other, and so forth and so
on. What is very problematic from my viewpoint are the speeches, discussions, and interviews
outside, when people talk about where they think interest rates should head and where the policy
rate should head. That’s where the criticism has been coming from. I have to tell you that a lot of
people whom I respect tremendously are saying to me that it’s making us look like the gang that
can’t shoot straight. I think it’s a really serious problem. I understand that we want to keep the

August 5, 2008

125 of 145

priority of speaking our minds, but we have to work as a team, and I think that we’re having a
problem in this regard.
Let me talk about why I think this is dangerous. It’s dangerous in terms of policy setting.
You can see this is very blunt. Clearly, if you were in a multi-period game, you wouldn’t be this
blunt. But now I’m not going to be here anymore, so you can hate me—I don’t care. [Laughter]
But this kind of cacophony on this issue has the potential to damage us in two very serious ways.
One is that it weakens the confidence in our institution, and I have to tell you that I love this
institution. It’s very hard for me to leave this place, but it’s something I have to do. If the
institution is damaged in terms of the confidence that the public and the politicians have in us, it will
hurt us deeply. It will hurt us in terms of policy because it will weaken our credibility, which
actually will make it harder to control inflation. So I consider this a very serious cost. The second
issue is on the political front. It is very possible that we’re going to have a reopening of the Federal
Reserve Act with the next Administration and the next Congress. The reason I think it is possible is
that we have to restructure our regulatory structure. There’s no way to get around it—we are in a
brave new world on this. That could lead to an opening of this issue. The problem here is, in that
opening, there are a lot of people in the Congress who are very uncomfortable having policymakers
who are not Presidential appointees and confirmed by the Senate. Two outcomes could come out of
that. One is that they could take the vote away from the presidents, which I think would be a
disaster because then you’re not going to have good people going into the System. We won’t have
boards of directors that will be good. We won’t have all of the benefits that we think we have from
the current system. The other alternative is that we then have presidents who are actually appointed
by the President and then confirmed by the Senate. I think, again, that hurts the private linkage.

August 5, 2008

126 of 145

So I feel very strongly about all three of these issues, but I think that you’re going to come
up with serious challenges in the future that could be very damaging to the System. So I hope you
think about this and still like me for being blunt, and also miss me because there will be a little less
amusement. Who else would have brought Monty Python into the FOMC? Thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you, Governor Mishkin. Governor Duke.
MS. DUKE. Thank you. I support alternative B. I don’t think that the “severe financial
stress” scenario is out of the question right now.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support alternative B for
the reasons that you and many others have already stated.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. I want to thank everyone for your comments
today. I know we don’t have agreement around the table, but as somebody once said, if everybody
agrees, then everybody except one is redundant. [Laughter] I listened very carefully to what has
been said. I understand your concerns. I think hard about them—I do every day. As we go
forward, we will obviously continue to have these fruitful discussions.
I do think that we need to continue to clarify this exit strategy issue. One point I would
make, and Governor Warsh alluded to it, is that we need to think of this as a state-dependent rather
than a time-dependent strategy. We need to be clear not so much as to whether we are or are not
going to raise rates but under what circumstances and why and what our objectives are. On that
basis, I reiterate that my greater attention recently to financial and real conditions has to do with my
view of the risks rather than my objective function.
I recommend no action today and alternative B. There were a number of suggestions for
changes. I think I will avoid them just to avoid further controversy. My reasons for suggesting

August 5, 2008

127 of 145

alternative B were well stated by President Pianalto. It’s hard to judge. I don’t know what the
markets will make of this, but my intention is for it to be slightly hawkish—to indicate a slight
upward tilt in policy—which has several functions. First, if we don’t move, it emphasizes our
ongoing concern with inflation and perhaps provides some prophylactic protection with respect to
expectations and so on. On the other hand, if conditions do warrant action, and it could be quick
action, at least we will have provided the markets with some warning and some indication of our
concern about this issue. So that’s my recommendation. Any comments? Would you call the roll?
MS. DANKER. Yes. This vote includes the alternative B language from the table
distributed this morning and the directive from the Bluebook.
“The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will
foster price stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives,
the Committee in the immediate future seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with
maintaining the federal funds rate at an average of around 2 percent.”
Chairman Bernanke
Vice Chairman Geithner
Governor Duke
President Fisher
Governor Kohn
Governor Kroszner
Governor Mishkin
President Pianalto
President Plosser
President Stern
Governor Warsh

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you very much. The next meeting is September 16,
and we will adjourn now to the Terrace Level of the Martin Building to pay honor to Governor
Mishkin. Thank you very much.
END OF MEETING

