January 21, 2008

1 of 32

Conference Call of the Federal Open Market Committee on
January 21, 2008
A conference call of the Federal Open Market Committee was held on Monday, January
21, 2008, at 6:00 p.m. Those present were the following:
Mr. Bernanke, Chairman
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Mr. Evans
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Kroszner
Mr. Poole
Mr. Rosengren
Mr. Warsh
Mr. Fisher, Ms. Pianalto, and Messrs. Plosser and Stern, Alternate Members of the
Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Lacker and Lockhart, and Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks
of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Madigan, Secretary and Economist
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Skidmore, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Sheets, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Clouse, Connors, Kamin, Sullivan, and Wilcox, Associate Economists
Mr. Dudley, Manager, System Open Market Account
Mr. English, Senior Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Dale, Senior Adviser, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Levin, Deputy Associate Director, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Judd, Rosenblum, and Sniderman, Executive Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of San Francisco, Dallas, and Cleveland, respectively

January 21, 2008

Ms. Mester and Mr. Weinberg, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Philadelphia and Richmond, respectively
Mr. Hakkio, Senior Adviser, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City

2 of 32

January 21, 2008

3 of 32

Transcript of the Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call on
January 21, 2008
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Good afternoon, everybody. Thank you for taking time on
your holiday. The purpose of this meeting is to update the Committee on financial developments
over the weekend and to consider whether we want to take a policy action today. I would like to
start with a brief update on the markets from Bill Dudley and take any questions for him, and
then I will introduce the issue, make a recommendation, and ask for your comments following
that. Bill, would you like to give us a short review?

MR. DUDLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since our videoconference on
January 9, the market functioning in terms of the bank term funding markets has
generally continued to improve, with the one-month and three-month LIBOR relative
to the overnight index swap rates coming back very sharply. They are now as narrow
as they’ve been since the market turmoil began. But elsewhere in terms of market
functioning, we started to see a step backward last week—especially late in the
week—when we viewed the asset-backed commercial paper market beginning to
deteriorate again, and there was some flight to quality into the Treasury bill market
late last week.
More important, the macro outlook and broader financial market conditions
have continued to deteriorate quite sharply. The S&P 500 index, for example, fell
5.4 percent last week; it is down almost 10 percent so far this year. Today it fell
another 60 points, or 4.5 percent, so that means that the cumulative decline in the
S&P 500, if it opens near where the futures markets closed today, will be nearly
15 percent since the start of the year. Global stock markets were also down very
sharply today—Monday. Depending on where you look, the range of decline was
anywhere from 3 percent to 7½ percent, pretty much across the board. Corporate
credit spreads and credit default spreads have continued to widen, and bank mark-tomarket losses and loan-loss provisions keep increasing. The Merrill Lynch and
Citigroup earnings announcements last week generally suggested a widening in terms
of the scope of losses, not just in subprime but also in terms of credit card receivables
and other loans.
A newish wrinkle here in terms of bank markdowns reflects the deterioration of
some of the monoline guarantors. Merrill Lynch, for example, announced a
multibillion dollar charge for its exposure to ACA, which is the most impaired of the
monoline guarantors. The other monoline guarantors are in better shape, but they’ve
either been downgraded, such as the case of Ambac by Fitch on Friday afternoon, or
are under review for being downgraded by a number of different credit-rating

January 21, 2008

4 of 32

agencies. The problem with the monoline guarantors is that raising capital has
become much more difficult. Ten days ago, for example, MBIA issued 14 percent
surplus notes, which are now trading at about 70 cents on the dollar. It’s not clear
how much additional capital is needed to keep the AAA rating. The goal posts keep
moving. S&P, for example, raised its loss estimates on subprime mortgages about a
week and a half ago, and this has implications for the monoline insurers in terms of
their capital adequacy.
So the bottom line is that, unless the monoline insurers raise significant additional
capital soon, further rating downgrades seem very, very likely. This has three
potential consequences that are noteworthy. First, in the money market space, a
number of money market products are wrapped by the monoline guarantors, including
variable-rate demand notes, auction-rate securities, and tender option bonds. Some of
these securities have liquidity support, so if the securities can’t be rolled over, they’ll
go to the banks, and this will increase the pressure on bank balance sheets. For those
without liquidity support, either they will be converted to longer-dated securities,
which the investors will be surprised to find out they are holding, or the dealers will
have to take them back on their books to prevent the auctions from failing. A second
consequence from monoline guarantor downgrades would be to the municipal bond
funds. The loss of AAA insurance raises the question of what the retail bond
investors do. Do they start pulling out their money and run? So far things are pretty
calm on that front. For example, last week the net asset values of some of the major
muni bond insurance funds actually increased a bit for the week. So there are no
signs of a run there yet, but we haven’t really explored this fully, given the fact that
only one major monoline guarantor has been downgraded and that happened late, late
last week. Third, financial institutions have to mark down the value of the
guarantors’ insurance as their financial conditions worsen. In contrast, the monolines
don’t have to mark to market. Downgrading the monolines frontloads the hit to
capital and potentially aggravates the magnitude of the hit to capital because market
valuations can overshoot. So it is not trivial to transfer this risk from the monolines
to the financial institutions given the distinction that the monolines do not have to
mark to market but financial institutions that use their insurance do.
At this point, monetary policy expectations have priced in a lot of easing over the
near term. As of Friday’s close, there were about 67 basis points priced in through
the January meeting at the end of the month and about 110 basis points priced in
through the March meeting (if you look at the April federal funds futures contract).
There is likely more than that now given the decline in the equity futures market that
we saw today. So the markets are expecting quite a bit from the Fed. I’ll be happy to
take any questions, of course.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Are there questions for Bill? President Lacker?
MR. LACKER. Can you explain that third consequence of monoline downgrades? I
didn’t quite get that.

January 21, 2008

5 of 32

MR. DUDLEY. The monoline insurers don’t have to mark to market the consequences
of the deterioration in, say, the structured-finance product they insured. All they have to do is
pay out, as it is incurred, the interest that the structured-finance product can’t pay out. So their
losses are going to be realized only very gradually over a long period of time. There is no sort of
foreshortening of all that into the present. In contrast, if a monoline guarantor gets downgraded
and so the financial institution no longer has the support of that monoline guarantee, they have to
write down instantaneously the value of the assets that were wrapped by that guarantee. So it’s
quite a big difference in terms of the market impact as you transfer that risk from the monoline
guarantors to the financial institutions that bought that insurance.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions for Bill? President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I don’t want to get ahead of what you might be
saying, but if Bill could give us a sense of what the markets are doing overseas, I would
appreciate just his sense of things.
MR. DUDLEY. Well, the market on Monday morning in Asia was down somewhere
around 3, 4, or 5 percent, and it was everywhere, including some of the emerging markets that up
to now had performed pretty well. India took one of its biggest one-day hits, for example, in a
very long time. Then, we got to Europe, and the declines in Europe were actually a little bigger
than the declines that we saw in Asia. For example, the Dow Jones STOXX 50 Index, which is
an index of 50 large European companies, was down 7¼ percent on Monday. The market went
down sharply at the open, it rallied back up a bit during the day, and then it came sharply down
again at the close. So for both indexes you are basically at or very close to the low for the day.
Bond markets reacted as you might expect. Bond markets rallied as people became more
pessimistic about the stock market. In the currency market, we saw the sort of normal risk-

January 21, 2008

6 of 32

aversion behavior. The euro underperformed, the dollar was in the middle, and the yen
appreciated as people were reducing their risk appetites.
I talked to some people about what was going on in Europe. I didn’t really feel as though
my contacts there were focused exclusively on the financial guarantors. That was part of the
story, but there were other parts of the story, including the idea that maybe decoupling isn’t
going to happen to the degree that we hoped. Also, part of the story was that the risks of
recession in the United States were increasing. So financial guarantors got part of the blame for
the stock market decline in Asia and Europe, but that by no means was the whole story.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Other questions? If not, let me just talk about the issue
here. I was reluctant to call this meeting, both because of the holiday and because the
Committee did express a preference on January 9 for not moving between regularly scheduled
meetings and I accepted that judgment on January 9. However, I think there are times when
events are just moving too fast for us to wait for the regular meeting. I know it is only a week
away, but seven trading days is a long time in financial markets. As Bill described, over the
holiday, global stock markets have been falling very sharply, both in Asia and in Europe. As he
mentioned, even though the U.S. markets are closed, the S&P 500 was off about 60 points today,
close to 5 percent. That makes the cumulative decline in the S&P 500 since our last FOMC
meeting 16½ percent. Obviously, it is not our job to target stock values or to protect stock
investors, but I think that this is a symptom of both sharply mounting concerns about the
economy and increasing problems in credit markets.
On the economy, the data and the information that we can glean from financial markets
reflect a growing belief that the United States is in for a deep and protracted recession.
Moreover, as we saw from the global markets today, the concern is rising that that recession will

January 21, 2008

7 of 32

have global consequences. Consequently, we saw, for example, an 8 percent drop today in the
German stock market. The dollar rose today, reflecting I think increasing belief that other
central banks will have to follow us in cutting rates, and oil prices are down to about $87,
reflecting expectations of slowing global demand. So it is not necessarily a U.S.-only story.
On the financial side, as Bill noted, a lot of things are going on. The latest is the likely
downgrade of one or more of the monoline insurers, which would cause banks and other
financial institutions to have to mark down billions more of their holdings. I think there is a
general sense—I certainly feel in talking to market participants—that it is not just subprime
anymore and that there are real concerns about other kinds of consumer credit—credit cards,
autos, and home equity loans—and that there is fear of housing prices falling enough that
contagion will infect prime mortgage loans. There is building in the market a real dynamic of
withdrawal from risk, withdrawal from normal credit extension, which I think is very worrisome.
Would a rate action today, before the start of trading tomorrow, be of help? I don’t
know. In some sense it was a lucky break that today was a holiday because in the middle of the
day we got a very good read on what the markets are doing tomorrow, and so we can get ahead
of things as opposed to being forced, after a couple of disastrous days, to respond. Again, I don’t
know if this would help, but I think that indicating that the Fed is on top of the situation and that
we are proposing to address economic and credit risks aggressively would help. In any case, it
would at least make clear that the Fed was in touch with the situation.
I think we have to take a meaningful action—something that will have an important
effect. Therefore, I am proposing a cut of 75 basis points. I recognize that this is a very large
change. I would not do that if I thought that the size of the cut was inconsistent with our
medium-term macroeconomic objectives. Let me discuss that a few minutes.

January 21, 2008

8 of 32

As I said to some of you, on Friday I had a briefing from Dave Stockton and his team
about their Greenbook forecast for next week’s meeting. They have not made an explicit
recession call, but they do forecast very weak growth going forward. More important, in order to
get that positive economic growth, they revised down their assumed path of the federal funds rate
by 100 basis points—50 basis points next week and 50 basis points in March. That gives a
cumulative decline in the staff’s fed funds assumption of 200 basis points since August, which is
consistent both with the markets and with a 225 basis point decline in medium-term r*, which is
an indicator of the neutral rate, as well as the optimal policy rate that they calculate. Importantly,
of course, we have lowered the funds rate only 100 basis points so far, so I think at first
approximation we are about 100 basis points behind the curve—something in that general area—
in terms of the neutral rate, and that itself doesn’t even take into account what I believe at this
point is a legitimate need for risk management.
With respect to risk management, these credit risks obviously have the potential to feed
back into our financial system and to affect the economy going forward. I hope to be able to talk
next week more about a simulation the staff is working on, which shows that a severe recession
would create extraordinary credit losses for our financial institutions, with implications
obviously for credit extension and for financial stability. It is just one indicator, but a paper by
Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff has been circulated in the past couple of days, which compares
some indicators of our economy with other major financial crises and finds that we rank at the
moment among the five largest financial crises in any industrial country since World War II.
Given what their indicators show, they conclude that, if we have only a mild recession in the
United States, it would be a very fortunate outcome. Now, I am not saying that this is
necessarily evidence, but I am saying that there are risks and that a careful approach should

January 21, 2008

9 of 32

allow for some easing with respect to risks. Governor Mishkin is not here. He is aware of this
meeting, but he is on the slopes—I think in Idaho somewhere. He has made I think a case for
being more aggressive initially, trying to address the problem, and then removing
accommodation as the situation calms down. I think there is a case for doing that, given the fact
that we have done 100 basis points and that we seem to have not really made a dent.
Now, of course, there is also the issue of inflation. Many of you have valid concerns
about inflation. Let me just make a few comments on that. First, in the Greenbook, despite a
100 basis point drop in the rate assumption and the scenario that I take as being in some sense
optimistic in that it avoids an outright recession, the preliminary Greenbook forecast for 2009
has total PCE inflation at 1.7 percent and core PCE inflation at 1.9 percent. This does not take
into account any disinflationary effects that would arise if we did have an NBER recession or
worse. Again, I note that we have, for example, effects working through oil prices, which the
Greenbook doesn’t take into account directly. So I think, obviously, that we have to continue to
watch inflation and inflation expectations carefully. It is very important to do so. But at this
point we are facing, potentially, a broad-based crisis. We can no longer temporize. We have to
address this crisis. We have to try to get it under control. If we can’t do that, then we are just
going to lose control of the whole situation.
So that is my case. I think we really have no choice but to try to get ahead of this. A
statement has been circulated. Those of you who wish to comment on the proposal—of course,
you can. You may wish to comment on the statement as well. But let me just stop there and see
what comments the Committee has. President Plosser?
MR. PLOSSER. Just as a point of clarification, I have not received the statement. I have
not had access to encrypted e-mail. May I ask that it just be read?

January 21, 2008

10 of 32

CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Certainly. Let me do that. I had one word in the second
paragraph—the word “broader”—which I will come to.
“The Federal Open Market Committee has decided to lower its target for the federal
funds rate 75 basis points to 3½ percent.
The Committee took this action in view of a weakening of the economic outlook and
increasing downside risks to growth. While strains in short-term funding markets have eased
somewhat, broader—add that word—financial market conditions have continued to deteriorate
and credit has tightened further for some businesses and households. Moreover, incoming
information indicates a deepening of the housing contraction as well as some softening in labor
markets.
The Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters, but it will continue to
monitor inflation developments carefully.
Appreciable downside risks to growth remain. The Committee will continue to assess the
effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely
manner as needed to address those risks.”
President Evans.
MR. EVANS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I strongly support this recommendation. At
our last videoconference, I was in favor of action at that time. The situation has deteriorated
since then. I think the macroeconomic outlook supports this type of move. As we look at the
data, we are on the edge of a more serious downturn. It is not exactly clear how large that will
be, but we ought to be pricing in at least 100 basis points of accommodation against what I think
of as sort of a medium-term neutral rate of about 4½, and this is a move that takes us there. I

January 21, 2008

11 of 32

think the growth risks are definitely greater, and the real question after this is what it means for
our meeting next week. But I strongly support this.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Stern.
MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I largely share your assessment of the situation
and certainly support this action and taking it now. What has really caught my attention is the
breadth of the weakness of the incoming data and the extent of the financial problems, some of
which Bill Dudley covered. I don’t have the sense at this point, given both the nature of the
incoming data and the state of many of the financial markets we pay attention to, that there is a
lot of latent or underlying strength in the economy. So that affects my view of the outlook as
well, and I think it is important that we move aggressively, decisively, and in a timely way.
Of course, the inflation numbers haven’t been all that I might have hoped for, and even
core inflation has been running a little higher than I thought it would. But even if we were in
some sort of more formal inflation-targeting regime—and, of course, we are not—I have always
assumed and always argued that, when you are confronting these kinds of conditions, you would
deal with that situation as effectively as you can first and return to your inflation objective when
conditions permitted. So I don’t have any trouble taking such aggressive action at this point.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Yellen.
MS. YELLEN. Thank you. I strongly support your proposal for a 75 basis point funds
rate cut today, and I like the proposed wording of the statement. The outlook has deteriorated,
not only since December but since our conference call. The downside risks have clearly
increased. I think the risk of a severe recession and credit crisis is unacceptably high, and it is
being clearly priced now into not only domestic but also global markets. Even so, I put the
stance, as best I can judge it, of monetary policy within the neutral range. Policy should be

January 21, 2008

12 of 32

clearly accommodative. We also need a cushion against severe downside risks. We need strong
action, and your speech has prepared the markets for actions of this sort. At this point, they are
expecting at our next meeting more than 50 percent odds of a 75 basis point cut. An
intermeeting move will be a surprise, but I think it will show that we get it and we recognize we
have been behind the curve. I think it will be assumed with this statement and action today that
we will move somewhat further as well at our next meeting. That is something we should
recognize—the statement creates that expectation.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Rosengren.
MR. ROSENGREN. I, too, strongly support reducing the federal funds rate 75 basis
points. I am very concerned about financial market conditions detailed earlier by Bill. It is
widely viewed in the business community that we are slipping into a recession. Problems with
consumer debt are growing. I am concerned not only that we might be in, or about to be in, a
recession. I am concerned also how severe a recession could be. It is time to take decisive and
aggressive action, and I agree that, even with this cut, downside risks remain. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Poole.
MR. POOLE. Thank you. I accept all the discussion about the risks of recession and the
risks of the financial markets. All those are relevant to what we do next week. But the key issue
for me is what we get by acting now rather than nine days from now. I note that the stock market
has declined, despite the fact that the market has built in the expectation of 50 basis points, with
some probability of 75. If we do today pretty much exactly what is expected of us nine days
from now, it is not clear that we are going to accomplish a lot that is positive, and I believe that
we run the risk of upsetting things in a couple of ways.

January 21, 2008

13 of 32

First of all, whenever we act between meetings, we set a precedent, and what this will do
in the future, maybe even in the very near future, is that whenever we have a stock market
decline of this magnitude, if we get some more of them—and we could easily—or whenever we
have some bad economic data—and we certainly could have some—there will be speculation in
the market as to whether the FOMC is going to jump in with an intermeeting policy action. So
we have to be confident in our own minds that we are not setting a precedent that we will live to
regret.
Second, this action will not be viewed in the marketplace as anything other than a direct
response to the stock market. I understand the comments about the other strains in the financial
markets. Although the thing that we have most commonly pointed to, and it has occasioned the
most market discussion, has to do with the behavior of the LIBOR rate, LIBOR seems to have
settled down. It is trading below fed funds, and the further out you go in the future, the lower is
LIBOR. So it seems to me that that situation has largely returned to normal.
So before I am willing to support, I need to hear compelling arguments as to what we
gain from acting today rather than nine days from now and what the risks of acting today are. I
think there are downside risks in acting today rather than nine days from now, and to me that
needs to be the focus of our discussion. I agree that the economy is weak, and I agree that there
are a lot of problems in the financial markets. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Who is next? Would anyone else like to
speak? Vice Chairman.
VICE CHAIRMAN GEITHNER. Mr. Chairman, of course, I support your
recommendation. I think it is the right thing to do. Even with this move, I think we are likely to
have to move significantly further. It is hard to know how much more and what the optimal

January 21, 2008

14 of 32

timing of further actions is going to be. It is very important, in the context of a move, that we
signal—as your statement does—that we will do what is necessary to provide a meaningful
degree of accommodation, a meaningful degree of insurance against a more adverse set of
financial and economic outcomes. If we were to wait until the meeting, we would be taking just
too much risk. I think it would be irresponsible to take the risk that we would see a substantial
further deterioration in confidence and in market prices, which would do substantially more
damage to market functioning than we have witnessed so far.
I think you said on January 9, Mr. Chairman, that the risk we have to worry about is not
so much that we have simply a mild, short, and shallow recession but that we face a much deeper
and more protracted economic downturn with much more damage to the financial system that
would ultimately require, if it were to happen, much more action in terms of monetary policy
with perhaps more-adverse consequences for future incentives and for the economy as a whole. I
think that that is a risk we have to worry about. It is very hard to judge what the probability of
that risk is. None of us can know for sure what the next nine days would be like if we did not
act. None of us can know the probability that the market will work through this stuff on its own.
It is a matter of judgment, and I think your judgment on this is right. I strongly support it. I just
would say again, although I don’t think any of us can support this with hard, quantifiable
evidence, that conditions are so fragile and so tenuous now that by not acting tomorrow morning
we would be taking an irresponsible risk that we would see substantial further erosion in
confidence. That would put us in a much weaker position to mitigate these risks going forward.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Yes, Mr. Chairman. I am troubled by this, I will admit. I understand the
arguments, and it is difficult to argue against dodging a crisis. It is a very daunting thought to

January 21, 2008

15 of 32

think about a crisis that you might have avoided had you just taken certain actions. I would echo
Bill Poole a bit in terms of understanding what we will get out of this and how we will deal with
backing away from this in the future because part of the reason we have the problem today, of
course, is the last crisis. The desire is to intervene, to get the market rates down, and to bring
confidence; but then our ability to pull out of that is compromised because we can’t be sure in an
uncertain world of how strongly the economy might be coming out of something. Therefore, we
often delay and create the next issue that we have to deal with—as we are today.
So I am troubled. I know the risk coming in tomorrow. I know we are being driven
heavily by these markets. At the same time, I think doing an intermeeting move commits us to
another move down the way. It will be hard to stay at rates that are not going to at least invite
another series of problems down the road because I see us at 3 percent by nine days from now.
So how do we deal with that? I would at least like to hear some discussion as we consider this
pretty substantial action tonight. Those are my comments.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lacker.
MR. LACKER. I can support a 75 basis point cut in the funds rate this month, Mr.
Chairman. I had been thinking of something less. The data last week were clearly negative,
clearly disappointing, so I could support 75 at our meeting. Like President Poole, I have real
reservations about moving now rather than waiting until our meeting. I think that in the situation
this is inevitably going to be viewed as a reaction to the falloff in equity markets. Interpreters
are going to take into account that we could have moved last week, after the slew of real data—
Thursday afternoon, for example, after the housing report—or we could have waited until our
meeting ten days from now. I worry about the message that this tactical choice sends about our
strategy. I worry about what it says about what drives our reaction function and what we believe

January 21, 2008

16 of 32

that we can control or offset. I share President Poole’s concern that what we gain isn’t clear. I
can appreciate the possibility of financial market fragility, but I don’t see the level of the funds
rate as real closely tied to conditions of fragility. I don’t think a funds rate change is going to
save the monolines. I don’t think it is going to save financial institutions from the monolines.
So I have reservations and would rather wait until our meeting. But I can support moving 75.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Lockhart.
MR. LOCKHART. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the earlier discussion on January 9, as
I recall, I not only supported a move but suggested that I would support an intermeeting move if
the conditions merited, and I do think they merit it. I am really in the same camp as President
Geithner. I am not sure I see what is to be gained by waiting another eight or nine days. I think
the psychology here is bordering on, shall we say, a spiral quality. A preemptive move like
this—preemptive on two dimensions, the rate dimension and the timing dimension—has a shot at
changing the overall psychology of the moment, including perhaps even creating an atmosphere
in which support for the monolines, if they are having trouble raising capital, might very well be
a more rational decision on the part of some investor.
I think we would appear much less panicky than we might have on January 9. We are not
doing this in combination with the TAF. The TAF actually appears to have done its work pretty
well, and the need for the TAF may be diminishing. Not much more data will come in the next
few days, if I have my schedule correct. I think we are at a kind of juncture now where the
spillover from the financial markets is not really much debatable; it is very clearly happening,
with risk of a dynamic that feeds off itself. So I am very supportive of this move, and that is
really my position. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Fisher.

January 21, 2008

17 of 32

MR. FISHER. There are some pros to moving now, and there are some cons. Clearly,
one of the pros is that we would have the element of surprise. It is a holiday. We have the
benefit of some knowledge of new data and what has happened in the market starting in Asia and
rolling through Europe, which Bill walked us through. I do have some concerns, however, Mr.
Chairman. I know you know what they are. I articulated them in a speech in Philadelphia, and
we discussed these a bit. I have basically the same concerns that President Poole, President
Hoenig, and President Lacker have. The question is, What do we get for this? What
expectations do we build in for future decisionmaking? My biggest concern, however, is that I
have yet to see convincing evidence that we are seeing movement on the inflation front. If we
were to cut rates to this level today, as of now, in terms of the headline CPI and PCE numbers,
we would have a negative real rate of interest, and I don’t understand quite fully what the
consequence of that would be. The projections in the Greenbook are just that—they are
projections. They can be right, and they can be wrong, as thoughtfully as they are constructed.
Unlike President Rosengren, although I am only about 30 percent of my way through my
CEO calls in preparing for the meeting, I don’t hear a widespread expectation of recession. I do
hear a concern about slowing down, and we have seen that in all of the indexes that I like to talk
about in the meetings from the credit card payables, delinquencies in payments, the Baltic index,
et cetera, et cetera. But the words “severe recession” I have yet to hear from the lips of anybody
but those in the housing business, and for them, it gets more severe with each passing moment.
So I am not convinced of the economic case, and yet I can see where there are some
benefits to moving now. The real question is, What do we do next? If the markets react by
blowing us off, does that mean that we will be expected to move aggressively at the next meeting
and then the next meeting after that? Or as President Poole has mentioned, does that mean that

January 21, 2008

18 of 32

we will have to have some more interim meetings? I am a little worried about being trapped by
this concept of being behind the curve. There is a fine line between being behind the curve and
what may be an overreaction. But, Mr. Chairman, I don’t have a vote at this meeting, and I
would just ask you to consider the arguments that have been put forward by Mr. Poole, Mr.
Hoenig, and Mr. Lacker and the ones that I have just given. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Pianalto.
MS. PIANALTO. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I support your proposal for a 75 basis
point reduction in the fed funds rate today. At the time of our last call, I was hesitant about
moving because it was in advance of some important data. Obviously, we got those data, and
they were very weak. Financial conditions, as many have indicated, have also deteriorated. My
conversations with the bankers in my District indicate that the earnings reports that are coming
out will demonstrate that problems have spread beyond just the mortgage sector. They are also
seeing deterioration in credit card and other consumer debt. I think that it is important that we
move in a timely and an aggressive way. I don’t think that there is much to gain by waiting
another week. In this environment, I do believe that we should make every effort to make sure
that we are more accommodative and not stay inadvertently restrictive, as the evidence suggests
we are today. So I do support moving 75 basis points today. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Plosser.
MR. PLOSSER. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I think we are in a very, very difficult
position. I don’t want to reiterate many of the points that have been already made. I certainly
appreciate and am sympathetic with the point of view that markets are fragile. Market
expectations, in terms of what they seem to be building into the path of the economy going
forward, seem to me extraordinarily volatile and pessimistic. I am very concerned about that.

January 21, 2008

19 of 32

That bothers me. But at the same time I also am very concerned about the expectations this sets.
While the U.S. market was closed today, we have heard what has gone on in the foreign markets.
I am very concerned that we are going to be interpreted as reacting to the stock market declines,
and I think my concern is that lowering the funds rate terribly rapidly with intermeeting moves is
going to set up a dynamic that is going to drive us into more and more of these and drive the
markets into expecting more and more from us. It is not clear to me that the fragility that exists
in the market in fact will be solved by rapid cuts in the funds rate. I share President Lacker’s
concern that it is not clear that lowering the funds rate is a solution to the problem of the
monoline insurance companies or others.
Having said that, I nonetheless would certainly be supportive of a very dramatic action at
our regularly scheduled meeting. Frankly, I am very torn right now as to whether to support this
intermeeting cut. My gut instinct tells me “no,” but I also have to recognize the views shared by
a number of our colleagues who are concerned about the fragility of the markets and the signals
we are sending. If we decide to go through with this today, I think that we will find ourselves in
a very tough position at our next meeting as to how much more will be expected from us and at
what rate. President Poole or President Lacker pointed out that it was partly our aggressive ratecutting in some periods that helped foster some of this, and we may be setting ourselves up for
another fall. I share Governor Mishkin’s view that if, in fact, we are to get aggressive, we also
have to be willing to take it back when times change. I understand that view, and I can live with
it, except the history of this institution is that we haven’t been very aggressive in doing that or
demonstrating our ability to do that.
So I have a lot of concern and caution about this move. I think it is going to affect
expectations of us as we move forward, and I think we need to be realistic about what it is we are

January 21, 2008

20 of 32

buying with this. I am not sure we are buying very much. Maybe we will calm some market
nerves. If so, that would be great, and it may be of short-run benefit, at least over the next nine
days. I worry what it is going to mean for us over the next nine months as we move forward. So
those are my views. I am not a voting member at this meeting, but I just wanted to share those
views. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Poole, did you want to intervene?
MR. POOLE. Yes, if I may. I have a question of fact first and then a further question.
Do we know at all what the ECB and the Bank of England are considering given that the markets
were open and they are the ones who have seen markets and know what is going on there today?
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. We don’t know what they are considering, but just to
anticipate my response to some of these comments, I think the situation in the United States, the
fundamental situation, is much more severe at this juncture than in Europe or the United
Kingdom. The basis for this move is not to calm markets per se but rather to get the funds rate
closer to where it ought to be on fundamental grounds. But to answer your question, I don’t
know what the ECB and the Bank of England are contemplating. You had a second question.
MR. POOLE. I think the market’s view, then, is going to be that we are responding to
the markets abroad. Our own market has been closed. I understand the futures market, but there
are a lot of people who don’t understand the futures market or know of its existence. So I think
that the investor on the street, if you will, will be saying that we are responding to foreign
markets. In terms of the problems in the financial markets, the monoline insurers and others, that
is a problem of the capital of those firms. Cutting the funds rate does nothing to build up capital
for those firms. I still come back to the point that I do not see a convincing argument for acting
today rather than nine days from now, and I see lots of downside to acting today because of the

January 21, 2008

21 of 32

problems that it is going to create for us in the future. I really believe that, and I just don’t see
the argument for acting today.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Governor Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I strongly support your proposal. As I noted in
our conference call a couple of weeks ago, I think our reaction to the incoming data and to the
change in financial conditions, even as of a couple of weeks ago, was much smaller than it
needed to be to stabilize the economy. We had a long way to go, and the situation has
deteriorated since then, a little bit on the data side—the consumption data were a little weaker
than we expected—but much more in the financial markets. We have a vicious cycle in housing
between the financial markets and the housing markets, where the decline in the housing markets
is feeding into the credit markets, which is feeding back on the housing market. I think there is
evidence, as others have cited, that it is spreading geographically a bit to other countries, which
means that the export support that we were counting on may not be as strong as it was, and
spreading to other markets like the consumer credit markets. I agree that the equity markets per
se aren’t our goal, but declines in equity prices destroy wealth. I think they are symptomatic, as
you indicated, Mr. Chairman, of a fear and a declining confidence in where this economy is
going. That dynamic of declining confidence and growing fear argues for early action despite a
number of reasons to wait for the next meeting.
I agree with President Poole that no one can be certain what the market reaction will be
and what kind of responses we will get now and in the future. We could look panicky. We
could set up expectations in the future that we would regret. But I think the greater risk would be
in not acting. Given the dynamic out there, living through another nine days before the next
meeting has a very high degree of risk that we could come into that meeting in a very, very

January 21, 2008

22 of 32

adverse spot in terms of where the markets are and what is expected of us. So there is no
guarantee of success here. That is for sure. But if I were going to place my bets—and I guess I
am as a voting member of the Committee—I would place it on acting now rather than later.
President Lockhart talked about the potential positive effects on psychology. I think that is part
of it. There are also just the normal channels through which monetary policy works on the
economy. Lowering interest rates will help in terms of asset prices, and it will help financing
costs; and given the risk of waiting, I think we should get to that right away. I agree that it is not
going to do anything directly for the monolines or for the other institutions that need capital. But
part of what is driving this fear and eroding confidence is the concern about recession. I think
lowering interest rates, doing it promptly, and doing it emphatically with 75 basis points, as well
as acting through the usual channels, will help ameliorate that fear.
In terms of taking it back, the point that President Hoenig made, I think the history of
what we have done is pretty complicated and more complex maybe than that we are always too
late taking it back. If we were always too late, we would have seen an upward trend in inflation.
But we haven’t. We have seen a downward trend in inflation for the past 25 years. So it seems
to me that the proof of the pudding is in the inflation eating, and I don’t think we have been
reluctant to—I mean, yes, you can argue that we should have done it one meeting sooner or that
sort of thing. That is all 20/20 hindsight. You know, you can always make that argument. But I
think basically monetary policy has accomplished its objectives pretty darn well over this period,
reacting to financial market distress and then taking it back when we see the distress being
alleviated. I think, President Hoenig, if we keep our eye on the inflation forecast, if we make
sure that we are forward-looking in that regard, that we will take it back in a timely way. Even if
we get started a meeting or two too late, we can move up faster after we start. So I don’t think

January 21, 2008

23 of 32

our history is so unambiguous that we are always late taking things back. I don’t think the
results support that kind of assertion.
I agree with you, Mr. Chairman, that we cannot take our eyes off inflation, particularly
inflation expectations. If we had a build in inflation expectations, that would set into motion a
very serious and destructive dynamic, especially with the dollar. But I do think that declining
resource utilization, a soft economy, even if it’s not in recession, will exert competitive pressures
on both workers and businesses as they consider raising prices. Our focus right now, as several
of you have remarked, given the risk to the economy, must be on financial stability and its
implications for the economy. That is where we need to focus our attention at the moment.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Warsh.
MR. WARSH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me just make a few brief points. First,
during the discussions on this call, we have described these financial markets as fragile. That
strikes me as rather euphemistic for what we have been witnessing really since the first of this
year, particularly what is being witnessed overseas today. The losses appear to be selfreinforcing. Panic appears to be begetting further pullbacks by investors, retail and institutional
alike. There seems to be continued interest in the safest currencies, and this pullback strikes me
as quite nondiscriminate, geographically and in terms of sectors, companies, and even entire
asset classes. Certainly, we shouldn’t be responding to those moves unless, when we think about
our credibility, we think about it both with respect to our inflation-fighting credibility and, I
think as Governor Kohn just said, our financial stability credibility. I think the standard for
moving between meetings is a very high one; but looking at the evidence, both in the financial

January 21, 2008

24 of 32

markets and in the real economy, and thinking about our own credibility, my sense is that we
rather convincingly meet that standard.
My judgment would be, if we chose not to act today, that we would in all likelihood not
make it until next week. There can’t be a ton of conviction that by virtue of 75 basis points
today we are going to redress some of this fear and some of the psychology that is working
against us in the markets. But just because we don’t have a panacea, just because monetary
policy can’t solve the monoline problem and can’t solve some of the other problems, doesn’t
mean that we shouldn’t be doing our part. It strikes me that by taking action today we are doing
our part. We are showing the financial markets and the real businesses that we do get it.
Speaking for myself, I am glad that the interbank funding markets are working better. That puts
them in a better position to take more advantage of changes in monetary policy. Through the
TAF and through time they are now lending to each other. But based on what has happened in
the last several days, it doesn’t look as though they are going to be lending to many others. So
our action today needs to be focused very much on that front.
With all that said, Mr. Chairman—and recognizing how quickly the decoupling
hypothesis seems to have raced away from these markets as quickly as it found its way into their
collective wisdom—we look to emerging markets and look to markets here in the United States.
I think our actions today will go some small way to ensure that markets come back to a more
realistic assessment, but we shouldn’t fool ourselves that somehow we in any way are going to
be solving this problem between now and the next time we meet. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. Governor Kroszner.
MR. KROSZNER. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think it is very clear that the
numbers have weakened significantly from where we were before. In some sense, the pieces are

January 21, 2008

25 of 32

starting to fall in the puzzle, and we were uncertain before—we are still uncertain—but there is a
lot more evidence of significant downside risks. So things, unfortunately, have been clarified on
that side. We have also gotten some data that are not particularly welcome on inflation, which
suggests that there are still some challenges there, both in headline and in core. At the last
meeting, a lot of us focused a lot on the potential for a regime switch. We haven’t really talked
about that much here, but I think this evidence suggests that there is much higher probability of a
fairly rapid shift from a growth state to a recession state. That is being reflected in the financial
market, so it is just a different way of saying similar things that the Chairman, Governor Kohn,
and others of you have said.
I think Bill would also say that the credit default swap spreads on a number of the
financial institutions have been going up, even as some of the liquidity issues have been coming
down. There are very strong concerns about significant losses coming down the line—concerns
not only about the monolines but also, as the Chairman said, about losses just because of the
problems in the consumer sector—increasing delinquencies in a variety of areas, not just in
subprime mortgages. That is going to put a lot of stress on bank balance sheets. Even though
the banks have been nimble in bringing in a lot of capital, they have also had astonishingly large
losses. If they continue to have these losses going forward, they just will not be able to churn out
the funding that is necessary to keep an economy growing certainly at anything that is close to
potential, probably nothing that is close to a positive rate of growth.
So it seems that it is sensible to buy some insurance and buy it through taking a bold,
decisive action now. The question, of course, is whether we do that now or whether we do that
in nine days. People have talked about the tradeoff that we have between the value of acting
now and averting the possibility of very negative outcomes over the next nine days and some

January 21, 2008

26 of 32

concern about developing a bad expectations dynamic and problems of people thinking that we
are responding to the equity markets in and of themselves, not what the equity markets are
signaling about the real economy. But I think things are different now than they were earlier in
the month, when I was not very supportive of moving at that time. First, we now have more data
in a variety of areas, and we have the concerns about the monolines. We have a more
substantive basis on which to move, so it doesn’t look as though we are responding to just one
particular thing; the pieces are there together. Second, there is a much clearer foundation from
the Chairman’s testimony and speech, in which he made it very clear that we would be thinking
about and seriously contemplating bold action. So now there is a foundation for this. This is not
just coming out of the blue or coming out of some rumors in the market. I think that is a very
different situation from the one we had before. Third, I think it is actually beneficial that we
have the meeting coming up in nine days. That gives us an opportunity to refine the message
fairly quickly if we feel we need to and to take further actions if we need to. So I come out, on
balance, thinking that the risks are too high not to act now. I acknowledge some of those
downside risks, but I see that there are very strong benefits to acting now.
But I do hear some of the concerns that people have raised, and I had some of these
concerns also, particularly with respect to inflation. I might suggest that in the last paragraph in
the proposed FOMC statement, which I am fine with, perhaps a way of showing a little more
concern about some of the inflation issues is in the second half of that sentence, where you say
“but it will continue to monitor inflation developments carefully,” to say instead “but it will be
necessary to continue to monitor those inflation developments carefully.” That might buy us a
little there because the statement is a fairly large move away from what we have said before.
This phrase is about the only one that we have repeated from before, and I think strengthening

January 21, 2008

27 of 32

that phrase may be beneficial. But I am supportive of the statement as is. Perhaps it could be
improved with a little strengthening there to address some of the concerns, but I am very much
supportive of the overall 75 basis point move now. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Thank you. President Hoenig, does a language change on
inflation help you at all?
MR. HOENIG. It is, I guess, helpful, but let me ask this. A point that was made earlier,
when you said that we are moving to where we need to be, in terms of the real rate, taking total
inflation, we are moving to real rates that are negative. I am fairly confident that, while this is a
bold move, it is also a precursor to another move a week or nine days from now, which would
put us in an even more negative position, when we are projecting the economy to be slowing and
when, in fact, total inflation is above—currently at least, year over year—4 percent. I understand
the concerns about the markets and people’s uncertainty. But we are taking these very dramatic
actions right now, more perhaps than what we need when you say “where interest rates need to
be.” If we were to go 50 basis points now and 50 basis points at the next meeting, we are still
moving down, but we are taking it in a more measured form. I am not convinced that isn’t a
better way of going, given where we are with the economy and given where we are with our
projections looking forward. That is really something that maybe you could at least address—
the negative levels of the real rate in terms of your comfort going forward and where we need to
be.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. All right. Thank you. Let me make a few comments.
Thank everyone for your input and your concerns, which I appreciate. This is a very, very
difficult situation, and no one can know exactly how this is going to work out. But let me try to
respond to a few points that were made. First of all, as I indicated earlier, I would not be

January 21, 2008

28 of 32

proposing this if I didn’t think that we were seriously behind the curve in terms of economic
growth and the financial situation. I said that on January 9, and since then the markets and the
data have only gotten significantly worse. I do believe that we are at least 100 basis points
behind the curve in terms of neutrality, and so I am quite comfortable with this order of
magnitude of move. Frankly, I think the evidence is very much in favor of it.
With respect to what the real rate is, I would combine my response to you with a
comment to President Fisher, which is that real rates depend on expected inflation, not past
inflation. Inflation is a lagging indicator. We cannot wait until inflation is down before we
begin to act. We have to look at the future. We have seen oil prices down $10 already. We just
have to make a judgment. With the economy slowing and with oil prices likely to moderate, the
best guess is that inflation will be well controlled going forward. If that is not the case, we can
begin to address it. But I do believe that, from a forecast viewpoint, we don’t have a negative
real interest rate, and we don’t necessarily have inflation above 4 percent.
I would like to address the issue of the lesson of 2001. I don’t think that the problem
with 2001 was the rate at which the interest rate was cut. The interest rate was cut more than
500 basis points, including three intermeeting moves of 50 basis points each in 2001.
Nevertheless, at the end of that episode, inflation was too low, which is evidence I think that in
some sense the response was even inefficiently slow. Not that they could have necessarily done
better, but clearly it was not the cut itself that led to inflation problems. Governor Kohn’s points
notwithstanding, and it was very difficult to know ex ante what was right, if there is a concern
there it has to do with how quickly the rate was raised starting in 2004 going forward, when the
economy was already on a growth path. I think we have learned from that. I think we will be
very sensitive to that.

January 21, 2008

29 of 32

Let me just add that I do intend to be talking more about the outlook and about policy. I
am sure that I will do my best to communicate where I think we are and how we are going to
manage policy going forward. I have talked specifically about the need to be aggressive in the
short run, particularly when financial stability is at stake. So again, my fundamental point is that
we are behind the curve. We need to do something to get up there.
Why does that help markets? Well, I think there are issues of psychology and dynamics
and damage that could be done if we let the markets twist and turn for another nine days. But the
fundamentals are also involved. The markets essentially—in their incredible efficiency—are
bringing into the present concerns about very bad outcomes that might happen in the future.
With fair value accounting, mark to market, and all of those things, the risk that house prices
might fall 20 or 30 percent, even the small risk, is affecting today’s credit ratings and credit
markdowns. We can help the markets in a fundamental sense by assuring them that we are
aware of these risks and that, though we are not going to necessarily stop a slowdown, we will do
our best to minimize the tail risks of a really bad outcome that are right now driving today’s
market reactions. That would help the monoline insurers in the sense that, if the markets become
convinced that those risks are much smaller, then the obligations of the monolines insurers will
be less, and the willingness to advance capital might be greater.
Again, if I thought that we were where we should be and this was just a question of
placating the markets, I would not be here talking to you. But I think that we need to move, and
if we move now, we will get a bonus in terms of at least some hope of reducing the fear and the
uncertainty that is currently in the markets. So I do think it matters whether we move today or
move nine days from now. I recognize the risks, but in the two years that I have been here in this
position, we have not moved intermeeting. We waited a long time to move in September after

January 21, 2008

30 of 32

our intermeeting statement. I don’t think that we are trigger happy. I don’t think we are
perceived as trigger happy. I think that we need to be catching up to where the right interest rate
is, and that is the essence of the issue. I guess that is all I have to say.
As I said, Governor Mishkin is not here. For what it is worth, he authorized me to say
that he supports the action and the statement. We are currently at a very critical juncture. We
are being watched very carefully. We have to demonstrate our willingness to address these very,
very serious risks. I think we ought to go ahead and take this step, and I hope that you can
support this action. Are there any other comments? President Hoenig.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I hear you, and I appreciate your concerns. I do
understand that there is a psychology in the market that is having its effect. I think if we make
this statement as strong as we can about the need to watch inflation, and if we understand among
ourselves that, as we take this action today and the follow-up actions that I am certain we are
going to take, we will watch these inflation numbers, including broad asset values—I know we
don’t prick bubbles and that sort of thing, but watching these broad asset-price movements—that
would be very, very important, at least to think about. I do not wish to be dissenting on this, as
troubled as I am about it. I do understand the psychology of it. For those reasons, I am willing
to go along with this. But I worry about our ability to deal with reversal as this takes place,
especially given where our projections for growth are right now and my concern that we already
have inflation above 4 percent. So I defer to you at this point. I would vote for it because I think
the psychology of the marketplace is, of course, rather fragile, and I will leave it at that. Thank
you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Did you want to accept Governor Kroszner’s suggestion?

January 21, 2008

31 of 32

MR. HOENIG. Yes. I think the strongest language as we can give would make me much
more comfortable.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Governor Kroszner’s suggestion was to say, “The
Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters, but it will be necessary to continue
to monitor inflation developments carefully.” Does that work for everybody? All right. If there
are no further comments, I would like to call the roll, please.
MS. DANKER. I will read the directive and then the statement and call the roll. “The
Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary and financial conditions that will foster price
stability and promote sustainable growth in output. To further its long-run objectives, the
Committee, in the immediate future, seeks conditions in reserve markets consistent with reducing
the federal funds rate to an average of around 3½ percent.”
The statement goes, “The Federal Open Market Committee has decided to lower its target
for the federal funds rate 75 basis points to 3½ percent.
The Committee took this action in view of a weakening of the economic outlook and
increasing downside risks to growth. While strains in short-term funding markets have eased
somewhat, broader financial market conditions have continued to deteriorate and credit has
tightened further for some businesses and households. Moreover, incoming information
indicates a deepening of the housing contraction as well as some softening in labor markets.
The Committee expects inflation to moderate in coming quarters, but it will be necessary
to continue to monitor inflation developments carefully.
Appreciable downside risks to growth remain. The Committee will continue to assess the
effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely
manner as needed to address those risks.”

January 21, 2008

Chairman Bernanke
Vice Chairman Geithner
President Evans
President Hoenig
Governor Kohn
Governor Kroszner
President Poole

32 of 32

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

MR. POOLE. And you could add this sentence of explanation, “President Poole does not
believe that current market conditions justify policy action before the regularly scheduled
meeting next week.”
MS. DANKER. Thank you.
President Rosengren
Governor Warsh

Yes
Yes

Thank you.
CHAIRMAN BERNANKE. Okay. Thank you very much. Again, I am sorry to
interrupt your holiday, and we will see you next week in Washington. Thank you. The meeting
is adjourned.
END OF MEETING

