Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
December 14,

1992

Attendance at this meeting was not recorded in the
Committee's files.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
December 14, 1992
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me start off by briefly reviewing
the meeting I had with President-elect Clinton in Little Rock ten days
ago.
I had about 24 hours' notice but a choice of days on which to go
down and visit.
It was fairly apparent that the basic purpose of the
meeting was to indicate a desire to work with the Federal Reserve.
Indeed, we spent more than 2-1/2 hours on a wide variety of subjects,
which I must say to you included perhaps 15 minutes on the Federal
Reserve and the rest on everything from Somalia, Bosnia, Russia, and
heaven knows what else.
But I found it a quite interesting meeting in
the sense that he exhibited, as I'm sure most of you know,
considerable detailed knowledge on a wide variety of subjects. He
clearly is very knowledgeable and conceptual about many of the issues
that confront us.
It was difficult to tell when I left whether I was
gaining an impression that might not be realistic with respect to his
potential views about his relationship with the Federal Reserve.
But
I must say, upon seeing the nature of the senior people whom he has
nominated for key positions on his economic team, that clearly is the
direction in which he is going.
I'm available to answer questions on this subject if anyone
wants to raise one, but obviously the main purpose of this call is the
update I indicated we would have following our discussion about Henry
Gonzalez's letters. But before I call on Don Kohn to brief us on his
review of the detailed minutes of our last meeting on that particular
subject, does anyone have a desire [to discuss] anything further on my
meeting with Mr. Clinton?
MR. BOEHNE. Did you get any impressions about how he views
the Fed as an institution and our role in the public policy structure?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Ed, we didn't discuss that directly but
if I read his body language and peripheral comments [correctly], his
views were clearly favorable as best I can judge.
We had a very short
break after about 2 hours into the meeting when he apparently spoke to
Mr. Stefanopoulous, and in discussing the content of our meeting
apparently made a special point about the importance of maintaining
the independence of the Federal Reserve System.
I must say that
everything I heard in our meeting was consistent with that and I
gained no indication of any concerns about the Federal Reserve, its
policy or structure, or the nature of the Fed as an institution.
MR. BOEHNE.
Do you have any impressions about how the new
Secretary of the Treasury might view some of those issues?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I know of no reason to believe
that his views would be otherwise. He certainly would not be expected
to be supportive of Chairman Gonzalez because I don't think he ever
has been to my knowledge. But we do have somebody who was brought up
in that arena, and I thought Mike Kelley might inform us as to his
insights.
MR. KELLEY. Well, I don't have any special insights but, as
I said to the Chairman when he asked me the other day, I can't imagine
in my wildest dreams that Lloyd Bentsen is going to go out of his way
to support an initiative by Henry Gonzalez.
It would indeed be

12/14/92

revolutionary in his career at this late date.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
That's what I like about Mike.
He
Does anybody else want to pursue anything
doesn't come to the point!
further on this?
If not, why don't I call on Don Kohn to brief us on
what he sees as the central focus or the nature of our rather random
discussion relating to the two letters that we received from Chairman
Gonzalez.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I can be brief also, I
hope.
The subject here is the videotaping and the detailed minutes
We have two letters [from Mr. Gonzalez], one to
[of FOMC meetings].
the Chairman and one to the Presidents; the one to the Presidents is
different.
I think there was a consensus among the Committee members
[at the meeting on November 17th] in terms of considerable concern
about the effect on the deliberative process of any release of
detailed minutes or of videotaping or audiotaping the meetings and
releasing [those tapes].
That was the focus of much of the
discussion, within the context of an understanding that a public body
ought to be as open as possible unless there are negatives offsetting
Within that consensus, we found that there wasn't
that [openness].
anybody in favor of a literal recording of the FOMC proceedings,
whether one called that a videotape, a transcript, or an audiotape.
The members who spoke up on this issue were against that entirely,
regardless of the lag with which that would be released. At the same
time, the members were divided, with a few more in favor than opposed,
on maintaining detailed minutes along the lines of the Memorandum of
Discussion that used to exist. However, [I'd note] two points. One
is that those in favor didn't want such minutes released for some
time--several years--because of concern about the feedback on the
deliberative process from that.
Secondly, all members recognized that
to get protection for several years we probably would need
legislation, and that had dangers in and of itself.
So, there was a
consensus against any literal recording and some division about
detailed minutes, with more in favor than opposed, though not
everybody spoke on that issue.
There were a number of issues also raised by members about
what the Committee tells the public, when it tells the public, and how
it tells the public.
In particular a lot of members wondered whether
we couldn't release some information sooner than we do now.
In going over what seems to be the
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
central thrust of the views of the Committee, I thought it would be
One is to send a response to Chairman
useful to do two things.
Gonzalez speaking for the Committee on what is directly relevant to
Briefly, if we send the letter, it would
the issues that he raised.
acknowledge the general principle as Don mentioned that openness in
public bodies is desirable unless there are really overwhelming
reasons not to be open. The letter would go on to say that Committee
members believed that literal records of proceedings or any detailed
record released before several years [had elapsed] would seriously
detract from the deliberative process by inhibiting the free flow of
information and ideas. The letter also would note the considerable
amount of information on FOMC deliberations already released in the
policy record. Apparently, Chairman Gonzalez doesn't seem to be aware
of that document.

12/14/92

In addition, I think that it would be useful for us to have a
subcommittee drawn from the Board and the Presidents which might look
into such questions as the immediate release of the directive; the
immediate announcement of federal funds rate changes, possibly with a
discount rate type explanation; whether and how more accountability
might be put into the policy record, especially for those voting in
the majority; whether a memorandum of discussion should be prepared;
with what lag it should be released; and what kind of legislative
changes would be needed to protect it before disclosure.
If the Committee is in general agreement with this, we will
draft a letter
and send it to all of you prior to sending it on to Mr.
Gonzalez. And I would appreciate any thoughts you might have even now
or in the next day or so.
Communicate them to Don Kohn so that he
might embody them as appropriate in the draft letter. In any event,
we will send the draft letter out within a short period of time, and
comments on it would be appreciated so that we can get the response
back to Mr. Gonzalez fairly quickly.
On the issue of the subcommittee, I would propose that
Presidents Boehne and Melzer join with Governors Mullins and Kelley-I'm trying to capture a representative group based on what I heard at
the [November 17th] meeting--to try to come together with a series of
views on the issues I raised and report back to the Committee.
Clearly, what we need is at least some general indications [of the
Committee's thinking] prior to the Humphrey-Hawkins hearings.
And as
a consequence of that, I would ask the subcommittee, if it's agreeable
to the rest of the Committee, to burden our February meeting--a
meeting that as you all know is rather long to begin with--with that
as an additional item of discussion. But I don't see any alternative
to getting this issue resolved so that we will be able to go into the
Humphrey-Hawkins hearings with a fairly
firm Committee position, if
that's at all possible, on this particular subject.
There's just no
question in my mind that the whole nature of the Gonzalez approach to
the Fed is going to surface at those Committee hearings even though
he's planning to hold special individual hearings on certain selected
issues that are involved in the numerous attacks he has made on the
Federal Reserve System.
I assume we don't have to rush ahead with the
the nice things
preparation for the hearing in which we reply to all
that Mr. Gonzalez is planning to say about how well we're doing our
job.
In any event, I open the meeting to comments on either the
letter or the nature of the topics that the subcommittee will be
getting involved with.
MR. ANGELL.
I had a question as to the 2 to 2-1/2 year
delay.
I understand the delay on the present policy directive because
what we're doing is waiting until the next meeting.
I think we have
to be careful that we not oppose a delay that's
not [unintelligible]
or defensible.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I had that same question. The original
proposal [for delay] that was made years ago was 5 years and then 3
years--that was coming from the Congress.
The one we're getting from
Congress now is 60 days.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that, whatever we might suggest,
it's a very slippery slope downward.
I think we'd be better not to

12/14/92

get into such specifications because there is hardly any way to say
that 2 years is different from 3 years or 1 year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.
why not 30 days?

Or 3 months.

Or 3 months.

And then somebody will say:

Well,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I agree with that.
I think it is a very
tough position to take. My own personal opinion would be just to say
"no" and forget it.
It's a clear answer.
MR. ANGELL.

You might defend that almost better than the

other.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that would be my opinion, but I'm
not sure that a majority of the Committee holds that view. Clearly,
that's one issue the subcommittee would focus on.
MR. LAWARE. The minute you discuss a timeframe for releasing
something you say that you're willing to consider having something to
release. The less said about it the better, as far as I'm concerned.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
wants to bring up?

Any further questions or ideas anyone

MR. MULLINS.
In your letter will there be any mention of the
subcommittee and its continuing discussion of these topics?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would just hope that Don would
phrase it in a manner that merely stipulates that obviously we are
always discussing these questions. But at this particular stage I
think there is nothing gained by leaving [the issue] open until we
have something to say.
MR. HOENIG.
I presume that what we're talking about is a
response both to the letters that were sent to the Presidents and the
letter sent to you, Mr. Chairman. Is that correct?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would think so.
I think we want to
respond with a single letter; but after it's drafted and you take a
look at it, comments on whether or not two letters might be preferable
are obviously [appropriate].
I hope we can put it in one letter.
MR. ANGELL.
I can see where the Presidents would like to
have one letter, but if anyone wants to send a letter with a
dissenting view from that of the majority, I think that would be
I
appropriate since Mr. Gonzalez wrote to [each of the Presidents].
don't think we should be seen as muzzling anyone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If in fact all the Governors and the
Presidents agree, I would feel that I could stipulate that I'm
If that doesn't turn out to be
speaking for all Committee members.
the case, and we obviously can't know that until we see what it is
we're dealing with, then I think alternate means are appropriate.
Anything else from anybody?

12/14/92

I think you are right
MR. JORDAN. This is Jerry Jordan.
that Chairman Gonzalez does not have any idea what information is
currently available, and I'd suggest in your letter that you might
also note that a number of Reserve Banks regularly, and for long
periods of time, have done ex-post reviews of the FOMC [decisions] in
For students of the subject there really is a lot of
the prior year.
information available.

else?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's a good point, Jerry. Anything
If not, we will see you all on December 22nd.
Is that it?
MR. ANGELL.

Is the meeting starting at 8:00 a.m.?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
everybody!

Yes, 8:00 a.m.

END OF SESSION

Merry Christmas

