Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
June 30-July 1, 1992

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the

offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in

Washington, D.C.,

on Tuesday, June 30,

continued on Wednesday, July 1,
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

1992,

at 2:30 p.m. and was

1992, at 9:00 a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Hoenig
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Melzer
Mullins
Phillips
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,
Siegman, and Stockton, Associate Economists

Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr.

Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Rosine, 1 Senior Economist, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Clouse,l Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low. Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs. Board of Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Lang, Ms. Lovett, Messrs.
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of San Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia.
New York, Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and
Atlanta, spectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston
Mr. Belongia, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis

Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

1. Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary
and debt aggregates.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
June 30-July 1, 1992
June 30--Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
operations. Mr. McDonough.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

Let's start with foreign currency

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any questions for Mr. McDonough?

I'm always struck by the purchasing power
MR. LINDSEY.
Further weakness in the dollar just doesn't seem
parity basis.
justified. Has that theory of exchange rates been routed or are we
Why isn't that showing through in the markets?
neglecting it?
MR. MCDONOUGH. I think it's not routed completely, but it's
certainly less important now because of essentially speculative
capital flows based on interest rate differentials and views of stock
markets. As I mentioned, I think what is hurting the dollar at the
present time is the interest rate differential, which is clearly
against us, and a view that Wall Street may not be as attractive [as
People are reading about the flows into equity mutual
previously].
The capital flow, which was really the
funds slowing down and so on.
source of strength in the dollar, is slowing down; and that is giving
us the weakness even though there's no question on a purchasing parity
basis that the dollar is far, far weaker than it should be.
MR. TRUMAN. It may be, Governor Lindsey, that one of the
reasons is that the conventional measures of purchasing power parity
for the DM and the yen are so far from where [exchange] rates have
been for so long--2.10 for DM, 190 for the yen--that they've lost
Still,
their credibility as a benchmark even for such considerations.
we can imagine [tolerating]--if you want to put it that way--exchange
rates at that level, and the associated current account deficits that
Now, that's one man's reaction to your question.
go along with that.
I have been struck by the work that McKinnon has done at Stanford on
this.
Two or more years ago there was some suggestion that we could
get back [to PPP] and, therefore, there was a lot of attention given
to that issue.
But with the dollar essentially [disconnected from any
anchor] on a purchasing power parity [basis] for such a long period of
time, it has lost its [relevance] and we should not use the word
"anchor."

MR. MELZER. Bill, you mentioned the market's expectations
with respect to what might come out in Munich in terms of multilateral
Is that an expectation that
intervention.
Is there validity to that?
has some substance behind it?
MR. MCDONOUGH. From what we hear, the Europeans don't have
any interest in any multilateral foreign exchange activity. And I
haven't heard anything from the Treasury as to their planning to
But the market is quite convinced that
[undertake such operations].
there is going to be at least a U.S./Japanese accord, which the
Europeans will probably bless but not participate in.

6/30-7/1/92

MR. TRUMAN. The Europeans are somewhat divided. The French
I think will go along with anything, but the rest of the Europeans
will not. My sense from my own conversations with Treasury staff,
unless their views have changed in the last several days, is that they
are not thinking of a deal, but one can never be quite sure when one
is dealing with the United States Treasury.
MR. MCTEER. Under the circumstances in Japan, I'm not sure I
understand why they would want a stronger yen. I know it would damp
inflationary pressures but it would also work against the real sector.
MR. MCDONOUGH. I believe there are two factions, but they
The
wind up in the same place coming from different directions.
Ministry of Finance thinks that it will be very convenient for them
politically in the bilateral relationship with the United States to
have a stronger yen.
The Bank of Japan seems to have a very firm view
that a stronger yen encourages capital flows into the stock market,
and they would very much like a stronger stock market because of,
among other things, the positive effect it would have on the tier-two
capital ratios of the Japanese banks.
MR. MCTEER. I always thought that a strong currency didn't
encourage inflows but that the prospects of a stronger currency later
did.
MR. MCDONOUGH. I think what you say is accurate, but what
I've described is the position of the Bank of Japan, I'm quite
convinced. They need not necessarily be right.
If you are
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's not contradictory.
the Bank of Japan and the yen is strong, the presumption is that the
probability of [the yen] getting stronger is higher than the
probability of it getting weaker. So, it's essentially the same
issue: at least that's what they're saying.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's especially true in stock
I was speaking to [unintelligible], which is what they're
markets.
hoping for.
MR. JORDAN. That logic has a chicken and egg problem if the
idea is that you want a stronger currency to help asset prices, but
what is going on in that market [relates to] this purchasing power
The dominant
parity in tradable goods, neglecting asset prices.
factor is what is going on in that system--weakness in real estate and
equity and other asset prices--and the idea that they can do something
with the exchange rate to turn around asset prices doesn't wash.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?
the report from the Domestic Desk. Joan Lovett.
MS. LOVETT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

If not, let's go to

[Statement--see

Questions for Ms. Lovett?

I was monitoring the "Call" this period and was
MR. JORDAN.
struck by a couple of things. There were at least two occasions when
the projection was for a need to add reserves but the funds rate was

6/30-7/1/92

trading down toward 3-5/8 percent.
So, even though the projection
would have called for adding reserves, at least tentatively the
program was to drain reserves in order to avoid giving a false message
to the markets as to our intentions. And then there seemed to be some
gaming going on in the Street by some banks that were bidding up the
funds rate just at the "Call" time. Whatever it was they were looking
at, they were thinking "Uh oh!" and trying to keep us from doing what
we otherwise would have done.
MS. LOVETT.

Even though they didn't want to have to do that!

MR. JORDAN. What is your reaction to that kind of heuristic
We would have wound up doing something in reserve
action-reaction?
supplying operations that really wasn't consistent with what we wanted
to do because of this perception. And then they would have a
perception on the other side regarding what we might do and try to
game it in order to prevent us from doing it.
It's one of the foibles of having a federal
MS. LOVETT.
funds rate objective that gets narrower and narrower. That did happen
on a couple of occasions and we didn't want to have to drain the
So, the fact that the perception out
reserves if we could avoid it.
there was that at certain rate levels and at certain times we didn't
have a tolerance [for actions] that would cause people to bid the rate
up is part of what one has to call the "market dynamics."
MR. JORDAN. You could now be in [a similar] position in the
opposite direction. With the funds rate at 3-7/8 percent if you saw a
need to drain, [you would] feel compelled to add reserves--to do
something that is not really consistent with supplying reserves--in
order to avoid giving a wrong signal.
MS. LOVETT. Well, we have a little more flexibility on one
side of the rate depending on the state of market expectations. There
isn't anyone out there who expects that the Committee is going to be
firming policy, so there's more tolerance for a funds rate that
deviates to the high side of the expected level than there would be
So, actually, we have
for a funds rate that deviates to the low side.
throughout this period felt somewhat more comfortable with having our
operations be a little loose on the up side--that is, letting funds
trade at higher levels without necessarily going in and offsetting it.
Whereas on the low side we wouldn't feel as comfortable because if
there were any direction to policy in this period, that's the way the
market thinking has been.
MR..JORDAN. That asymmetry, though, is due to market
perceptions that we are conditioned by real magnitudes; they think
we're responding to things we can't control anyway. But the follow-up
Over this last week the market tried to [interpret]
question is this:
that failure to cut the funds rate, in a reserve supplying sense, as a
relative tightening of policy. From the Desk perspective, would you
view it as tighter?
MS. LOVETT.
basis points.

The market has built in a good amount of the 25

6/30-7/1/92

MR. JORDAN.
So, maintaining the funds rate is more
restrictive than lowering the funds rate given where the Street
[thinking] is?
MS. LOVETT.

In fed funds terms, the market--

MR. JORDAN.
Well, [I mean] in terms of reserves.
We have to
supply less or drain more in order to maintain the same funds rate,
given where the yield curve is.
MS. LOVETT.

No, I don't think so.

MR. KOHN. I'm not sure about that because the amount of
reserves is very small.
I agree with Joan's earlier implicit
assessment that if the Committee does not ease at this meeting,
particularly if the employment data were on the soft side, short-term
rates would back up a little. The market has built in a Fed reaction
to the incoming data.
I think that's equivalent to what you're
saying.
MR. JORDAN.
Not quite because I don't really interpret
tightening in terms of where the funds rate is.
I really don't care
[about that].
MS. LOVETT.

But the market does.

MR. JORDAN.
I do care about reserve operations.
If the
yield curve is under downward pressure, wouldn't you drain more
reserves or supply fewer reserves than you would have otherwise in
order to support the same funds rate [objective]?
In this recent
period when the funds rate was trending down you were saying you saw a
need to ease but you actually were going to have to drain reserves to
maintain the same funds rate.
MS. LOVETT.

We may have to drain.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. We have seen some improvement at the long end,
with rates coming down.
I was going to ask you--this may be unfair-to look at what has occurred since the last meeting, not on a day-today basis but rather on a week-to-week basis.
We now have a long bond
rate just a tad above 7-3/4 percent. How much of that is consistent
with the fairly steady pattern we're seeing of, if not softness, a
lack of firmness in the real sector and then a building in of further
ease in the market?
Again, it comes down to the question of
expectations. What I'm asking, and I'll try to be more direct about
it, is:
Do you view the improvement that we've seen in the long end
fitting in with the market's expectation of what we might do?
MS. LOVETT. You're right that there has been a better tone
underlying the long end of the market. And the barrier, which seemed
to be 8 percent for the longest period of time, now seems to be 7-3/4
percent.
The long rate doesn't seem to be able to get through that
barrier; it has been at about the 7.80 percent level, which is where
it was at the time of the last meeting also.
So, there hasn't been
too much net change over the full intermeeting period, even with the
decline--

6/30-7/1/92

MR. SYRON. I thought it went up after the [ previous
directive] came out indicating symmetric language and then-MS. LOVETT.
MR. SYRON.
depends on where--

Yes, and then it came back down.
It came back down as the data weakened.

It

MS. LOVETT.
It's hard to say.
The fact that the recovery
doesn't look robust certainly has been a factor in any improvement in
the long end of the market.
But in discussing what the long end will
do [in response to] Fed policy, it usually turns on whether or not the
long rate is going to back up, not so much whether there's a chance
for sustained improvement. Most people in the market don't [consider
it likely] that there is room for a sustained improvement in the long
end for quite a while.
There's at least a sense that people have to
wait to see whether or not this improvement in prices is sustained,
and there's a lot of skepticism about that.
Some people don't think
the progress has been all that it should have been. And then we have
The market also frequently makes reference to the
these deficits.
global demands for capital.
Finally, our own statements may not be
So, people
adequate, and there are all these political uncertainties.
don't seem to have a lot of high hopes for the long end of the market
doing a lot better. It's really a question of [rates] moving back up
if the Fed were to ease.
MR. SYRON. I don't know what caused [a move of] 10 basis
points one way or the other but it was interesting to me that on
reports of symmetric [language in the directive] the market backed up.
MS. LOVETT.

Right.

MR. SYRON. And then they saw, if not a softening, a lack of
firmness in the economy--not an enormous amount but a measurable
amount.
MS. LOVETT. Right, and I do think the fact that the recovery
doesn't look like it's rolling ahead has been a help for the long end.
If not, would
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?
somebody like to move the ratification of the transactions since the
last meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Move it.

We now move to the
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
Chart Show:
Messrs. Prell, Stockton, and Truman.
MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We'll be referring to
the set of charts that you all have before you labeled "Material for
Staff Presentation to the Federal Open Market Committee."
MESSRS. PRELL, STOCKTON, and TRUMAN.
Appendix.]

[Statements--see

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much, gentlemen.
Questions from any of the Committee members?
Vice Chairman Corrigan.

6/30-7/1/92

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
implied in Chart 17?

What is the potential growth rate

MR. STOCKTON. Basically 2 percent throughout the forecast
Obviously, beyond the next
horizon and 2.1 percent as time goes on.
three years what potential output will be is certainly open to much
wider question. But the evidence in the last few years at least makes
us reasonably comfortable with something in the 2 percent range.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
rate projection?
MR. STOCKTON.

What is your labor force participation

It would go up a few tenths over the period.

MR. PRELL. This potential output assumption is basically
what we communicated in that report on potential output, with the
adjustment that was needed because of the change in the 1987 base year
for the output measures.
So, essentially, what is built in
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
here is a modest further increase in the labor force participation
rate. Even allowing for that and taking the potential growth rate at
2 percent, what I find really surprising--bordering I guess on
unbelievable--is that if you look at case 2 versus case 3, the
cumulative difference in the real GDP growth rate is always 0.6 of a
percent over the whole period. And the absolute difference, of
course, in the unemployment rate at the end of the period is only 0.5
That strikes me a little as magic.
percent.
MR. STOCKTON. Well, part of the problem is that in the price
stability case there is a timing difficulty. It has to do with the
lag [in] Okun's law relationship that relates real GDP to
unemployment.
In the stable inflation case, you can see we're easing
up growth a lot at the very end of the simulation in order to try to
In effect, if you carry out the
limit the potential overshooting.
price stability simulation a little further, the unemployment rate is
going to be down to about the natural rate within a year from the end
The
of that simulation. So, that limits the discrepancy around 1997.
simulations use the identical Okun's law relationship so that there
isn't any structural difference in those two simulations. But there
is in the quarterly model, with relatively long lags elsewhere for the
unemployment [rate].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Further questions?

MR.. PARRY. You talked a bit about the effect on inflationary
expectations of our goals with regard to inflation. I wondered if you
had done some work or had a judgment about what some of the possible
advantages might be of our being more explicit about our goals and how
that might affect inflationary expectations and therefore the actual
tradeoff between growth and inflation that results from pursuing those
objectives.
I certainly don't have any particularly wisdom
MR. STOCKTON.
to add on that point. We did a similar exercise a couple of years ago
for the Committee and we talked a great deal about the role that
I guess one could look at this current
credibility might play.
episode and, given the output losses we have already incurred to

6/30-7/1/92

achieve the disinflation that we have, feel that it's difficult to see
The costs seem pretty much
in that any credibility effects so far.
If there were a dramatic break in the regime--in the
[as expected].
way in which monetary policy was made--one certainly couldn't rule it
out. And one cannot rule out the fact that credibility even in
financial markets and among wage and price setters may not come as
It could very well be that at some
smoothly as the models suggest.
point in the next year and a half or two years there will be a
significant break in inflation expectations. But I suspect that the
effects on output costs and disinflation will have more to do with
your actions rather than your pronouncements.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We in the past have had various studies
suggesting that there was an inverse correlation between the degree of
price stability and productivity. I assume that that's not embodied
So, to that extent one
in here; that [takes] a much longer time.
might presume that there is some underestimation of the real gross
domestic product here at the lower price expectations levels.
MR. STOCKTON. That's correct, Mr. Chairman. We've made no
adjustments here in terms of our expectations for future potential
output or the effect of price stability itself. Our research suggests
that to the extent that correlation is there, it occurs at very long
time intervals, probably perceptibly beyond the time interval that
we're considering here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. What would be the impact of following case 2
versus case 3 on the saving rate and thereby the investment rate over
that period?
MR. STOCKTON. Well, the feedback from that to actual
potential output would probably be very minimal within the time frame
It's certainly the case that in the price
that we have here.
stability example the short-run effects of pursuing that policy, which
would require higher real interest rates for a period of time in order
to bring inflation down, would be adverse for capital equipment
investment. But over the longer term in none of these cases is the
sort of natural rate of interest being influenced by the course of
monetary policy within this time frame.
Our estimates suggest that
because there is an interaction in the long run between inflation
through the tax system that is adverse [to] investment, the benefits
to potential output growth over the long run would be positive from
In the short run, though--for the time
pursuing case 2 versus case 3.
period that we're considering here--it's not clear that we see that.
It would be more [true] of a 10-year horizon.
MR. ANGELL.
So, the argument for case 2 really is that the
benefits would appear in the period from 1996 to maybe 2006, which I
think everyone would admit is a very long time.
MR. PRELL. When you do a present value calculation, [given]
the distortions with a non-indexed tax system, the payoff doesn't look
bad for the short-term sacrifice.
But it is a substantial sacrifice
in the short run.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

6/30-7/1/92

MR. LAWARE.
I'm a little puzzled by the projected effect of
food and energy prices.
We've been seeing a lot in the press just
recently and also in the Beigebook about crop problems this year and
cutbacks in beef and pork, and yet you forecast very modest increases
in food prices in the CPI this year and even next year. And on the
energy side we see increased imports and you seem to dismiss the
effect of that by not believing that OPEC and Saudi Arabia are going
to stick to a more restricted production capacity.
Is that because
you see it being fully offset by Iraq returning to the market?
MR. TRUMAN. On the OPEC side, there is a considerable debate
in the market as to exactly what Saudi Arabia's position is.
There
was a runup when the market thought [the Saudis] were shifting their
position, and then it backed down somewhat when uncertainty was
introduced. We have predicated our forecast on the assumption that
they haven't shifted their position on market share.
That is because
they have been increasing their productive capacity and it would seem
to be a waste of money to increase productive capacity if they weren't
going to use it.
And we have Iraq coming in three months later than
we had before, so that's a negative factor. This forecast of a drop
in oil prices from the current spot rate is essentially the same as in
the futures market.
It is a bit more optimistic but the optimism is
on the order of 50 or 75 cents a barrel.
So, for better or worse,
it's essentially consistent with the market forecast, which for
obvious reasons is taking the same view, and that leads us to [a
forecast of] a little more of a drop-back.
MR. STOCKTON. On the agricultural side, it's obviously too
early to tell yet how this year's crop production will turn out.
Indeed, there has been a great deal of volatility in the markets in
the past month and a half. As you know, it looked as if the weather
would be dry and then in the last few weeks the rains have come and
the situation has looked considerably better.
We're not expecting to
see any serious disruptions in terms of crop production this year.
But inventories are lean and if I had to say which side the risks
might be on I'd say that if we did see a shortfall, there could be a
potential price spike.
We're expecting meat production to pick back
up this year and we think that is going to keep the lid on meat prices
as well.
Basically, on the food price side, a really encouraging
development was the significant break we saw last year.
[Previously,
food price increases] had been running in a reasonably high 5 to 5-1/2
percent range. And a big chunk of that [break] is attributable to the
nonvolatile components.
It just looks as if underlying food price
inflation and probably wage developments as well have settled down
considerably.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Back to Chart 17:
I want to ask a question on
potential, just in terms of gross orders of magnitude. If we were to
follow case 2 right now, say, and [the economy] were running below
capacity in the interim, the question I have--and I think I know the
answer--is about the relative magnitude of the investment that is
given up because of running below potential for a while and how that
influences potential in the out years even beyond [your forecast
horizon].
It's probably not great.
There were other questions about

6/30-7/1/92

I was wondering
how these various approaches could affect potential.
to what extent the foregone production and the share of production
that would go into investment have been incorporated and what the
magnitude of that would be.
MR. STOCKTON.
In terms of the price stability scenario and
the interest rate assumptions that go along with that, we would look
for the level of business fixed investment through the end of '96,
let's say, to be roughly 5 percent lower than in case 1, the
disinflation case, which is more of a middle ground type case. But I
don't think even in the longer term that that is a transitory
reduction in investment; we don't really see that having significant
negative effects for the overall rate of capital accumulation further
down the road.
If anything, we think at some point that would turn
around and, because the tax distortions would be less, that we'd
actually see better and more productive investment further out.
MR. SYRON.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
On Chart 10, the household spending chart, what
kind of job growth lies behind the personal income and consumption
dynamics that you've laid out?
MR. PRELL. Dave showed you some numbers for the household
employment increase. Basically, we have payroll employment gains
creeping up toward a level of 150,000 per month by the end of the
year, which is really a very modest increase relative to the trend,
say, in the last decade. And that's reflected in the very slow
progress that we see in the reduction of the unemployment rate.
MR. BOEHNE.

What do we have for the year to date roughly?

MR. PRELL. Well, we've had only a very small increase in
total payroll employment.
I'm not sure what it is.
We're approaching
1 million on the household series, I think.
SPEAKER(?).
Payroll
300,000 so far, hasn't it?
MR. PRELL.
December to May.

[employment growth]

has been more like

Payroll has gone up only about 300,000 from

MR. BOEHNE.
So, even though it's modest growth, we still
have to have a notable increase in the rate of job growth?
MR. PRELL. Well, a little better than we have been doing.
The last couple of months have been in the ballpark. We would expect
to get some acceleration, but it's quite modest overall.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. On Charts 5 and 6, just to make sure I heard
what you said, is the projected improvement in our export figures due
more to the devaluation of the dollar than to the economic activity in
this country?

-10-

6/30-7/1/92

MR. TRUMAN. No, most of it is due to economic activity. The
dollar, although it has moved around and is at the low end of where it
has been, doesn't stay there.
It may be wrong in the forecast per se
because it has been up and down for the past year. What I meant to
say was that, in comparing the two halves of 1993, the relative
[widening] of the gaps between the red and the blacks bars is a
function of the lower level of the dollar as a secondary effect that
plays out.
MR. HOENIG.

Okay, thanks.

MR. PARRY. Related to that, do you have more conventional
assumptions about income elasticities of demand for imports?
MR. TRUMAN. It's on the order of 1-1/2 percent, though we
have this level because we're picking up additional factors on
[unintelligible] and that pushes up the
capacity utilization
[unintelligible] end of the income elasticity
on the import side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.
Back to that
comment about inflation:
I'm very
sympathetic to the latter part of your presentation and your responses
I think this issue of the transition costs and how they
to questions.
are related to the credibility of our commitment to price stability
deserves a lot of attention. That's a very difficult issue but a very
important one, and I think we need to keep reemphasizing it.
But I
found Chart 14 very disturbing. Whatever the model or theory we have
[to explain] those kinds of relationships [as they may relate to]
progress toward actively reducing inflation, it gives rise to the
perception on the part of the public at large and political people
that credibility of that the commitment is tied to our ability to
withstand political pressures, in other words the willingness to
[unintelligible].
Credibility of the price stability commitment is
tied to tolerance of slack, a gap of actual output below potential, or
an unemployment rate above the natural rate.
So then it becomes a
contest of political wills, which I don't think any of us believes is
embodied in what we're doing.
To tie together the progress toward
reducing inflation
to any kind of real magnitude [in] explaining what
monetary policy has done or is doing shifts the nature of the
discussion, I think.
MR. PRELL.
MR. JORDAN.

Of course, this isn't a public discussion.
I understand.

MR. PRELL.
I would emphasize that basically we are looking
from various points of view here at the debate that one might have
about the progress we'll make.
This relationship has proven to be
quite robust in the short run, though as Dave Stockton emphasized this
is not a fully specified model.
We are not taking account of
expectations effects, which are obviously very important in shifting
the short-run Phillips curve around.
But there is information in this
approximation slack is what gives us the
that suggests that to a first
disinflation force.
And I think we need to confront that internally
in our policy decisions in terms of what tradeoffs are acceptable in
the short run, recognizing as Dave emphasized that over the long run

6/30-7/1/92

-11-

the actions might build credibility and lower those costs and make
those short-run tradeoffs increasingly advantageous.
MR. JORDAN. But even that response--saying that slack gives
[impetus to disinflation]--may be based on a model that says the
appearance of slack is information that people use in forming their
Some
expectations. I don't know how people form their expectations.
people will cite budget deficits; some people will cite the past; some
will cite politics.
But by saying that it has to do with slack or
unemployment being above what is perceived to be an acceptable rate
may be simply something that helps people form their judgments about
But that again ties it back to a tolerance on the
future inflation.
part of this group to that slack or unemployment--and I find that very
troubling--rather than the more straightforward way of saying that
what we're talking about when we talk about inflation is the
purchasing power of money over time. And, therefore, one would talk
about it in terms of money growth.
MR. SYRON.
I thought this was just looking at the stylized
facts.
Have we had any period in modern history in which there was
substantial progress in the fight against inflation without slack?
MR. PRELL. Well, one can look at dramatic regime changes-major currency changes and so on--to see whether there were tradeoffs
I'm not sure
in those instances and try to find information there.
the results are uniformly favorable.
I appreciate your point,
President Jordan, but from our perspective there has to be some
And that mechanism
mechanism that gets you from money to prices.
historically seems to involve some constraint on aggregate demand
expansion, some weakening of demand for resources, some slack that
evolves, and then there is the wage and price response.
One finds
only limited evidence--Dave has worked on this in the past--of a more
direct effect which may be consistent with a view that all wage and
price setters out there are watching the money stock trends and
adjusting their expectations accordingly. But that isn't obvious; the
statistical evidence is limited to support that kind of direct
channel.
But if one could declare with absolute credibility that
inflation will end next week, then it would be costly for people to
What could one
behave in any other way. So the question does arise:
do if one of those [unintelligible] was raised here to enhance the
credibility of that commitment. Of course, once you fail, then you've
lost that--

MR. JORDAN. Well, I don't disagree with the dynamics that
I'm
you're describing, given the institutional context and the rest.
just hesitant to explain to anyone that I think inflation will come
down because of the high unemployment rate.
MR. PRELL. Well, we're always very attentive to that
political problem in writing public statements. But some sense of
that, I think, is abroad and it doesn't come as a very great shock to
people that that is the mechanism that many people have in mind.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?
Bob.
somebody like to start the discussion?

If not, would

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, uncertainty about the direction of
the Twelfth District economy has increased since the last meeting. It

6/30-7/1/92

-12-

has become clear that many of the District's states that previously
had posted solid employment gains have weakened in 1992.
The District
as a whole has posted employment gains of only 0.1 percent between
December 1991 and May of this year.
All states except Oregon and Utah
have registered either little increase or actual declines in
employment since December.
Since the beginning of the year
California's employment has stopped declining. However, employment is
1.5 percent below the level of a year ago and downside risks clearly
remain. Northern California is following the national pattern, but
southern California is exhibiting further weakness.
Manufacturing
continues to report job losses, and more declines in aerospace are
expected in the Los Angeles area. Moreover, addressing the state
budget deficit is likely to weaken the state's economy further.
Current estimates suggest that the state has close to an $8.1 billion
deficit. Cuts of that magnitude would reduce next year's nominal
state and local spending below that of the fiscal year just ending.
Failure to accomplish cuts by tomorrow will force the state to issue
scrip.
Negotiations have been deadlocked, particularly on cuts in
education spending, which also is likely to see nominal spending below
the current level.
Finally, the agricultural sector is facing hard times.
Drought conditions prevail in Idaho, Utah, and eastern Oregon, leading
to low yields and some acreage reductions as well as herd reductions
in the cattle industry. While drought conditions are not as severe
this year in California, prices for many commodities, including
vegetables, cotton, and citrus, are down sharply from a year ago,
leading to low profitably and some losses.
Turning to the national economy, I believe that a moderate
expansion will continue throughout the remainder of this year and in
1993. Although consumption data for May were disappointing and I'd
say somewhat worrisome, they were not too surprising in view of the
very rapid growth in consumer spending that we saw in the first
quarter.
Overall, I wouldn't be surprised to see somewhat faster
growth this year than is projected in the Greenbook, but the
difference certainly is well within the normal range of error.
I also
would agree with the Greenbook that underlying inflation is on a very
gradual downward trend. However, it is surprising that we have not
seen a more rapid decline in inflation, given the slow growth over the
past three years.
And I believe it is possible that the Greenbook may
be a little on the pessimistic side.
Perhaps a more explicit
statement of our inflation goal and our plans to achieve it might
dispel questions about our resolve and lead to improvement in
inflation expectations. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Starting first with a
comment on the staff forecast:
Our forecast is very similar to the
staff's in terms of the numbers; the pattern, though, is somewhat
different.
Our GDP forecast for '93 is lower than the staff's and in
fact is lower than our forecast for this year. The differences seem
to be in the auto and housing sectors.
Our forecast for sales of cars
and light trucks in the second half of next year is lower than the
staff forecast by about 500,000 units at an annual rate.
Our outlook
for long-term interest rates also is not quite as optimistic as the
staff's and, as a result of that, our housing starts for next year

6/30-7/1/92

-13-

also are lower than theirs.
These two differences, of course, lead to
secondary differences at least in terms of growth.
Our inflation
forecast is very similar to the staff's; we're a little lower this
year and about the same for next year. While the differences between
the forecasts aren't that great, assuming that this year and next year
work out about in line with either of these forecasts, in my view the
bigger question is whether there is enough momentum in the underlying
economy to be sustainable.
After three years of comparatively weak
growth, the likelihood of a fourth year of weak growth this year and
perhaps a repeat next year for a fifth year of the same, [the question
is]:
Is this the best we can do and will this growth be strong enough
to improve significantly the employment problem as well as the
utilization of our industrial capacity?
I have growing feelings that
it will not--that this is not a satisfactory forecast--and that in our
policy discussion we will need to take steps to try to develop some
stronger growth.
In terms of the region, while many of the major sectors of
the District's economy have shown some improvement, here again the
durability as well as the strength are open to question. The major
The
area of improvement has been in the auto manufacturing sector.
second-quarter production schedules were somewhat over those of last
year. Third-quarter schedules have been set preliminarily at levels
about 17 percent higher than last year. But those schedules are based
on the expectation that retail sales will increase from current
levels; and if they don't, then we would expect the production
In turn, the suppliers to the auto industry
schedules to be reduced.
In the steel business, for example,
have seen some pickup in orders.
they expect to ship some 21 million tons in the third quarter, up from
20 million tons in the second quarter.
For the full year they are
forecasting shipments of 82 million tons; that's not a bad year. And
the improvement in the steel business is not just on the auto side;
for example, shipments to appliance manufacturers are also a bit
higher.
Housing
Other parts of the District have been a bit mixed.
activity was higher in May than in April, though April was quite weak,
and transaction volume has been pretty good. However, retail sales,
which increased in May, seem to be down in June; at least the reports
Weather may have been
are that sales were a little on the soft side.
a factor; it has been exceptionally cold in our part of the Midwest
and people just are not buying the things that they normally do at
this time of the year.
In the agricultural sector, we may be in for a difficult
summer. We had an exceptionally wet spring, which resulted in a
difficult planting season. That was followed by an exceptionally dry
spell and has affected much of the corn and soybean crops of the
District. And most recently we had frost conditions in Michigan and
Wisconsin, which have had an effect on the fruit crop. Despite that,
it's still early enough that if we get a reasonable break on the
weather from this point on we should get pretty good crop yields. But
given this uncertainty in the farm area, sales of agricultural
equipment have been very weak--surprisingly weak--and indeed were
described as terrible by one CEO. As an example, combine sales in May
were some 80 percent under the volume sold last May. Therefore,
production schedules, which had already been reduced, are now in the
process of being cut further.

6/30-7/1/92

-14-

On the employment front, District employment has increased by
about 100,000 since the low point in August of 1991, but despite that
increase we still have recovered only about 25 percent of the losses
that we sustained during the recession. Many manufacturers are
continuing to implement staff reduction plans, and I just don't sense
any fundamental improvement in the underlying employment conditions.
Inflation continues to look constructive. Intensive competitive
conditions seem to be an absolute lid on significant price increases.
The people I talk to say the pricing environment for all products is
really very tough. One major manufacturer, admittedly [with] an
enormous amount of clout, is achieving a reduction of almost 1 percent
in the cost of outside purchases this year. And I must say that in
talking to people I just don't have any sense that inflation is a part
of their current thinking.
Net, while I think the District has shown
improvement since the last meeting, the strength of the underlying
momentum and the vulnerability of this level of activity are the major
questions. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Let me start with
the District activity. As in the nation as a whole, the pace of
improvement in the Sixth District that became evident in the first
quarter has tapered off.
The District's economy is relatively
dependent on housing activity in the nation as a whole, so the
downturn in housing activity--or moderation perhaps in the pace of
home sales and building at the national level--has been very quickly
felt in the District.
Our most recent survey of manufacturing plants
also reflected this; our respondents' outlooks were a bit less
optimistic than the month before. At the same time it was still a
relatively positive report.
In general, a fairly broad-based but
moderate expansion seems to be taking hold in most areas of the
District with the exception of oil-dependent Louisiana and South
Florida.
The situation in South Florida is linked to declines in
interest rates, as you would expect with the heavy retirement
population there. As for other areas, consumer spending appears to be
moving ahead, with nondurables, particularly apparel, continuing to
sell quite well. Auto dealers are also showing some improvement.
While the business contacts I have met with recently appear
confident that growth will be sustained, they're very clearly
disappointed with the pace of expansion and are looking for greater
growth.
At the same time, their comments don't indicate that a lack
of liquidity or financing is a problem anymore. If anything, they're
reporting improved cash flows from lower interest rates, and several
have noted that banks have become increasingly aggressive in efforts
to make loans. Only a few of the people that I've talked to believe
that a further easing of policy would provide much help or would
generate the enthusiasm about the outlook that seems to be missing.
Rather they think it's going to take a long time to work off the
imbalances that developed during the 1980s. As others have said, in
the Sixth District we're not hearing any reports of price increases at
all.
So, while there has been some [moderation] in activity in the
District, I think it is still relatively good albeit quite modest.
Now, with respect to the national outlook, we have some minor
differences with the Greenbook in the various components of GDP but
our forecast is basically the same.
We still have a substantial

6/30-7/1/92

-15-

difference in the forecast of inflation, which we see as being
basically unchanged through 1993.
I guess I'm a little less confident
than I was at the last meeting that the recovery has really taken
hold, although I still think we're in a sustainable recovery.
It may
be that this is the best we can do for the time being.
It seems to me
that we need to keep in mind that monetary policy can't raise the
economy's potential, at least in the short run. So, in general, while
I think we're moving ahead with some falling back perhaps in the rate
of growth, we need to measure our policy response very carefully.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. The big economic news in the Fifth District, as I
suspect many of you know, is that it may soon be possible to buy a BMW
that has a honk with a southern accent! BMW people have just
announced that they are going to build a huge new factory in northwest
South Carolina that will create jobs for about 4,000 people. I wish
that had been announced before our last directors' meeting when you
Mr.
had an exchange with our protectionist-minded
Chairman, who has been mourning the loss of those high paying
jobs and their replacement by this sort of thing. But there is an
unfortunate side of this in that South Carolina paid about $150
million in subsidies in order to get that factory. So, this is not a
purely economic decision but it does augur well for that particular
Now, beyond
part of the country at the expense of some other part.
that, not much really has changed in the region. Gradual recovery
seems to be continuing and business people are generally optimistic
about the near-term outlook pretty much across the spectrum of sectors
and industries. The tone of the anecdotal information, though, at our
last joint meeting of our three boards was a little less positive than
it had been at the meetings immediately before that.
Against this
background, we think the optimism about the future could fade pretty
fast unless actual business activity does accelerate at least a little
in the fairly near-term future.
At the national level, our projections are very close to
those of the staff. We expect slightly more real growth and slightly
less inflation, but the differences are not really significant.
The
question of where the risk lies seems to me to depend largely on how
much weight one wants to give to the persistent weakness in M2 as an
indicator of what lies ahead.
We're still inclined to discount most
of the recent weakness that we've seen because we feel most of it
comes from the portfolio adjustments that are reflecting the
structural changes in banking and financial markets with which all of
us are very familiar.
But the longer this weakness persists, the more
uneasy it makes us.
Our uneasiness was heightened by the excellent
analysis in the second part of the Feinman/Porter memorandum which
suggested that M2 is by no means dead.
So, on balance, we think the
risk of error is now moderately on the down side rather than the other
way around, given this renewed contraction in M2 that apparently has
been taking place in June.
Despite whatever questions there may be regarding the real
side of the projections, we are very comfortable with the staff's
projection that inflation will come down. This is also our projection
and in fact we expect somewhat more decline than the staff does both
this year and next.
And we think there's a good possibility that a

6/30-7/1/92

-16-

growing acceptance of this belief on the part of the public would work
to bolster real economic activity.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
The District economy continues to expand slowly
with New Jersey the weakest of the three states. Manufacturing has
been the relative bright spot, although by no means robust.
Retailing
has been flat to up slightly, reflecting in part the weather but also
just the general weakness in the economy.
The sense I have in the
housing area is that it has been slowing, but in the commercial real
estate area there are people close to that market who feel that it has
reached bottom.
Some of the deals are now attractive enough that some
properties may begin to move, although there's no real hard evidence
of that; that's just a sense.
The major weakness in the District has
been in the job market. We've had a weak labor market now for many
months.
There is some hint of improvement perhaps in the
manufacturing area, but overall there continue to be losses in jobs in
the District. At banks, consumer lending is up some but business
lending is still soft and I don't hear any of the talk about bankers
being aggressive, at least from the point of view of the business
community. All in all, I think the District continues to expand but
probably more slowly than the nation as a whole.
What strikes me about the national economy is that almost
wherever one looks the various sectors are either weak to begin with
or, after some improvement for several months, are in the process of
slowing.
That again puts the spotlight on sustainability. What we're
counting on for the Greenbook forecast is that out of this slow and
slowing situation we're going to get enough job growth and generate
enough income that it will feed enough consumption to keep a modest
expansion going during the second half of this year and then next
year.
I have more doubts about this sustainability than I did several
weeks ago.
If growth in the early part of this recovery had been at 5
or 6 percent or 4 to 5 percent or even 3-1/2 to 4 percent, I think
this slowing in momentum that we're experiencing would be welcomed.
But the strongest quarter we've had is under 3 percent; and this is
supposed to be the fastest part of the recovery, so there's not a lot
of downside margin.
If there were brighter prospects from exports or
something stronger outside the immediate job/income/consumption
dynamics, I'd feel more confident about achieving this [projected]
growth rate of 2-1/2 percent or so.
But there just isn't much margin
and we appear to be going into a period of some slowing. So, I think
the downside risk is greater than it was a few weeks ago.
And while
monetary policy should never depend on one particular indicator, it
seems to me that the key area we need to look at with regard to the
sustainability and dynamics [of this recovery] is job growth.
If we
don't get even the modest kind of job growth that underlies this
Greenbook forecast, the expansion is going to break down. If we see
some signs of this job growth [expectation] not being met, then I
think this expansion has some real problems and we will have to take a
serious look at what our options are in the monetary policy process.
I think we can largely discount what is happening to M2, but
what bothers me is that M2 was growing slowly and now has turned
negative and it's in the context of total credit being very weak.
If
the weakness in bank credit were being offset by credit from other
financial intermediaries, it would be easier just to forget the whole

6/30-7/1/92

-17-

So, there are a lot of good reasons
thing. But that's not happening.
for discounting M2 but, putting it all together, one just has to have
a nagging feeling that there is something here that is reflecting the
underlying demand in the economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District continues
MR. HOENIG.
to grow very sluggishly in my opinion. We have seen some job growth
in construction, particularly residential construction, over the last
year. This is primarily in our northern area, in Omaha and in the
Beyond that, agriculture is at best steady;
Denver, Colorado area.
we've seen some production loss in wheat because of the weather but
So, we don't
that is being helped a little by some firmer prices.
expect a drop there but we're not seeing [that sector provide] any
strength to the economy, as it has in the past. Our manufacturing
sector was very sluggish through the first quarter; while we have seen
some improvement there anecdotally, it really has been very modest at
best. Others have talked about the auto industry; we've not seen any
pickup in jobs in plants in our area, at least to this point. Our
energy sector is, as it has been, very, very poor for a lot of
different reasons, so it's not generating a lot of activity in our
region of the country. So, we expect continued growth but at a rate
less than we're seeing for the nation as a whole.
As far as the national economy goes, we also are very close
to the Greenbook projection, which we would note was adjusted down in
the period going forward; that's consistent with our view. We see the
economy growing very sluggishly and we're sensitive to that.
That is
consistent with the type of credit activity we're seeing on loans and
So, we think there is a downside risk
what is being reported to us.
to the economic recovery right now and, although we see improvement in
the inflation rate, we think that downside risk is something to be
alert to as we go forward with the policy discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.
Mr. Chairman, the economy of the Eleventh
District, which did better than the U.S. average during the recession
and the first phase of the recovery, seems to have fallen back to the
Previous sources of strength have
average of the U.S. recovery.
dissipated somewhat; activity is essentially flat now with employment
growth barely perceptible and certainly too slow to cut into the
There's
unemployment rate, which is about at the national average.
just no sense of momentum in the District as far as I can tell.
At the national level, we have no quarrel with the Greenbook
although we believe that the risks are greater on the down side.
It
appears that the strongest quarter of 1992 may already be behind us.
declining defense spending, which will be
The headwinds include:
going on for a long time; the overhang of real estate, which will be
with us a long, long time; the need and desire to reduce debt at all
levels in the economy; the fact that there is no room for fiscal
All of
stimulus; and now the recently diminished export prospects.
these headwinds seem too strong for the stimulus of lower short-term
interest rates.
It may even seem surprising that we have the strength
of the recovery that we do have in view of all these longer-term
trends. Our own staff's optimism about the sustainability of this

6/30-7/1/92

-18-

second phase of the recovery seems to have waned somewhat lately.
We're concerned about the slow growth of M2.
While we have been
discounting the measured M2 somewhat because of the special factors
that we all know about, we're still concerned because even after
taking those into account there appears to be some slowing in M2.
The
problem with all this is that I'm not sure there's anything we can do
about it.
It seems to me that further easing moves at this point are
just as likely to raise long-term interest rates as to lower them.
But I believe we ought to consider [a move] carefully. And if we
think a further slight easing of monetary policy might result in a cut
in the prime rate, even if it did not result in a lower 30-year bond
rate, since the prime rate-based lending is so important to the small
businesses and the entrepreneurs who are so essential for job creation
at this point, we might want to consider it on that basis.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
In terms of the economic projections, we're an
outlier at the high end in both years on real GDP and the CPI.
I
don't put a lot of credence in these projections in general in terms
of how helpful they really are in the policymaking process.
But even
if we were where the staff is, with a somewhat more modest projected
recovery, I would actually be somewhat encouraged by that.
I think
the monetary policies that we have pursued really have been quite
different than those pursued in and around other postwar recessions.
And I think the fact that we're coming out of this recession with a
much more modest growth rate gives us the chance to make some
sustainable progress on the price front.
I would say in general that
the pattern in the past was that monetary policy was much too
stimulative in and immediately following recessions; and that has been
associated with much higher rates of real growth than we're seeing
now. But that creates relatively soon, in a matter of several years,
a fairly tricky [choice to] reverse course to keep things expanding.
So, I'm actually not discouraged by what we're seeing here. In terms
of what our fundamental job is, that may set up a unique opportunity
for us.
The other thing, which is not something that I've heard
around this table but when I read it in the papers I cringe, is this
thought that the low measured inflation we're seeing right now somehow
gives us room to do things.
It may in a sense if we could perform
this high wire act and figure out when to reverse [course] again. But
I really think the effect of our actions on inflation ought to be
based on what we see happening two or three years down the road and
not on the concept that low measured inflation right now gives us
perceived room in somebody's mind to do something.
As far as what we're seeing in the Eighth District, it's the
same pattern that I've been reporting. We continue to have job growth
that's considerably in excess of what we're seeing nationally. And
the pattern is still the same:
We're seeing very modest declines on
the manufacturing side that are made up by fairly significant growth
on the non-manufacturing side, generally across the board except in
mining. There is particular strength in construction; residential
construction contracts remain very strong. We're seeing some slowing
on the commercial side, which had also been very strong.
The
anecdotal information that I'm hearing is consistent with continuing
improvement.
I'm not picking up any ebullience but I haven't picked
up some of the negative vibrations that I've heard others report here.
In terms of the anecdotal information, I see a pattern, for what it's

-19-

6/30-7/1/92

worth, of an expansion that's continuing to take hold, with confidence
among consumers and business people that is increasing and no warning
signs on that front.
MR. BLACK. Tom, when you said you were an outlier on
inflation did you mean on the low side?
MR. MELZER.

No, on the high side.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I personally agree in
almost every detail with the outlook presented in the Greenbook. The
possible exception is the unemployment rate, which I think might be a
little slower to come [down] than is indicated in that forecast. I
must admit I'm a little surprised at some of the comments I've heard
around the table. It seems to me that we're getting pretty much what
we expected for the first half of the year or maybe doing even a
little better. If I look back at the Humphrey-Hawkins numbers that we
put together in February or just think about the Greenbook forecast
over time, it seems to me that the numbers have come in pretty much as
expected.
I don't see any really negative surprises in what has
unfolded. We were expecting a modest recovery and what we're getting
For what it's worth, we run an exercise in
is along those lines.
updating our forecast with the latest evidence on the national economy
that has become available since the last meeting, and we did it again
this time, of course. Our model, by the way, is purely statistical;
there are no judgmental factors in it at all.
The evidence that has
become available has looked rather mixed, but when we put it in the
model we got pretty much the same forecast that we had before the
So, I take it from at least that one
latest data became available.
indicator that what we're getting is pretty consistent with what we
thought we would get as we go along here.
I might add, John, in regard to the question you raised about
food inflation:
Talking to people in a couple of big companies in the
food wholesale and retailing business in Minneapolis recently, they
said they think we're overestimating food inflation at the consumer
and wholesale levels. We're going to be meeting with them further to
try to understand what the difference is, but their view is that it
has been pretty tough to raise prices in that business as well. We
will see if we can find out a little more about that.
I would think that the risks, at least in terms of real
growth, may be on the up side as much as on the down side at this
juncture. I say that on the basis of the anecdotes that have come my
way recently in the District.
The obvious caveat, of course, is that
the District is pretty thinly populated and may not have a big impact
on national performance.
Just to give you a formula for this:
Tourism was at a record last year but all the tourist spots are way
ahead of last year so far this year.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. STERN.
Canada!

It has been discovered by Canada!

I don't know; maybe we ought to secede and join

-20-

6/30-7/1/92

MR. BLACK. You have an awfully big sample in relation to
your universe! Let's look at it that way.
MR. STERN. Highway construction has been strong; I take it
that is tied to the highway program that was put in place at the
federal level, but we're getting a number of reports along those
lines. Residential construction has been strong; auto dealers seem
encouraged; and retail sales in general have been pretty positive.
It's not that everything is positive.
The military bases, especially
the air bases in the District, are adversely affected by what is going
on there. And there is some expectation that the [influx of] Canadian
shoppers, who have been streaming across the border for quite some
time now, may slow. In the past that kind of information would have
led to some sense of despair; but this time people seem to be
shrugging it off as something they can deal with.
As for M2, I think I'll await Don's wisdom on that subject
before I comment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the First District
we have not had a great change since the last time we met.
But I
would have to say now that it's on the soft side of "mixed."
The
reason for that characterization is that there is a lot of variance
within the District. The only place we're seeing any significant
bounce-back is inside [Interstate] 495 in the greater Boston area,
where the economy does show some signs of strength with vacancy rates
stabilizing, commercial rents stabilizing, and residential prices
actually firming. But all of this is because M2 is behaving the way
it has!
That's an exaggeration, but we're seeing enormous flows into
mutual funds.
I meet with people from the mutual funds fairly
frequently and they actually are at the point where they are concerned
now and are sending warnings, if I can characterize it that way, to
people who are investing in junk bond funds. They have had just
enormous flows-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're saying that M2 has an inverse
correlation with the [inflows to mutual funds]?
MR. SYRON. That's right, because of the importance of the
management of funds and institutions [whose assets] don't count in M2
and their being a big part of the greater Boston economy.
MR. LAWARE.

Boston strives to be different!

SPEAKER(?).

As the non-M2 economy!

MR. SYRON. That's right, the non-M2 economy. See, that's
why we've always been heretical!
But there really is a concern about
a potential break [soon] in the equity market and also further out in
the junk markets. There's a lot of worry about how sophisticated many
people are who are reaching for yield coming into this market.
On a
more serious note, once you get outside the greater Boston area, the
periphery--my notes here say "the periphery"--is poor. And that, of
course, is tied in large measure to what is happening in the
manufacturing sector.
We're not benefiting for reasons that don't
have anything to do with the national economy and the improvement with

6/30-7/1/92

-21-

computers. It has to do with the problems in the high-tech industry
generally in New England, though we are suffering from the pull-down
in defense.
I think we're just in a long and inevitable period of
readjustment here that's going to be painful. Looking sector by
Retailers, excluding autos, report a somewhat weaker
sector:
situation; housing is slightly weaker compared to the last time except
at the low end of the market; and manufacturers, particularly of noncomputer high-tech products, have seen some fall-off in their foreign
sales but some slight improvement domestically. As for capital
spending plans, the only reason anyone we talk to is investing is not
to increase capacity but because they have the notion that they have
to do it to remain competitive in a tougher world. The price
situation is very similar to what we have heard elsewhere, with lots
Bank lending
of pressures on margins and prices looking quite good.
is still quite slow and, given the amount of capital that has been
raised by many institutions, I think it's less because of supply
constraints and more generally because of the [slow]down in demand.
[Unintelligible] anecdote, we find that these things always seem to
This week the Rhode Island crisis was
take a year and a half:
resolved a year and a half after it started--at some substantial cost
to the state, as is always the case.
As far as the national economy goes, we're in general
agreement with the Greenbook. However--and this isn't a comment on
the Greenbook so much--in going through the exercise myself for a
Humphrey-Hawkins forecast this time I noted that at least in my own
forecast, and I think this has been true generally, the central
tendency for the last four years has been for serial optimism in our
forecasts for economic growth and, with the exception of one year,
I'm not saying that that's going to
serial pessimism on inflation.
continue going forward, but I think it is instructive that we have
generally been too optimistic on the economy and too pessimistic about
the price side.
In my own view I'm nervous about a lack of firming or
cumulative [improvement] in the economy and how this will fold
We're not seeing a firming, and a great deal of new
together.
softness is emerging. On that score, the numbers that we've been
getting on unfilled orders now for three quarters of the year become a
What is the dynamic for this to come
concern. One starts to ask:
together? We keep talking about confidence, but unless we see some
improvement in income, we have to start to wonder how sales are going
to keep going. And as for the improvement we've seen in income so
far, even with the most recent figures income is not growing as much
as retail sales and an awful lot of that income is in transfer
If we look at what has come from employment in the profit
payments.
sector, we don't see anything there that is consistent with an
improvement in confidence. All things put together, we would expect a
somewhat higher unemployment rate than the staff, but marginally so,
based on about the same outlook for GDP. We think the staff forecast
is pretty evenly weighted; however, I'm concerned that the cost of a
My
mistake is not evenly weighted but [is greater] on the down side.
view may be formed too much on the basis of conversations with people
who are worried about continuing financial fragility and what will
happen if there's too much disappointment in the marketplace.
As far as the Ms go,
I'll make one final comment on this:
despite the inverse beneficial impact in Boston, we've always been
But I do think they say something. Just
rather skeptical of the Ms.
looking back over the last decade, unless we get a break back up in M2

6/30-7/1/92

-22-

we will be further outside the M2 and M3 target ranges than we've been
in the last ten years in an environment in which we would have to say
that, at least thus far, we've been disappointed with the economic
performance we've seen. I think that puts us in a potentially
difficult position in explaining our actions as we go forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that we ought to assume that the
economy is really moving along at about a 2 percent growth path in the
first half. I tend to discount somewhat that little higher number for
the first quarter, and I wouldn't consider moving back to 2 percent in
the second quarter and maybe only a little higher than that in the
third quarter as being out of line.
It seems to me that it's very
difficult to derail and change the direction of an economy. We have a
huge transfer payments support network in this economy, and I just
don't see what it is that's going to turn all this around. We're
seeing a lot of the same things we've been seeing for some time but I
don't see new sources of weakness out there at this time. Whereas my
forecasts for real GDP and the CPI are identical to the staff's for
1992, I have some concern about the particular mix that the staff uses
to get there.
And it seems to me there's a vulnerability.
I think
this adjustment period we've been in is really an adjustment period in
regard to the personal saving rate in our economy. I expect the
personal saving rate to be inching up whereas the staff has it pretty
flat.
I also see the trade deficit moving south again as a
vulnerability for the foreign exchange value of the dollar. And with
the dollar as weak as it is, any move at this point that would be
associated with a lower fed funds rate could quite easily be
interpreted as Federal Reserve acquiescence to a depreciating or
devalued dollar.
And I'm not sure how world capital markets would
react to such an event. There's a real potential for upset in that
regard. Corporate profits and cash flows look pretty good, so the
saving rate in the business sector may be much better than in the
government sector, which doesn't look like it's going to respond very
rapidly and yet does, I think, provide a considerable amount of
restraint.
So, it seems to me that we're in a circumstance in which our
being seen as focusing on price level stability has more payoff than
any other action in terms of having faster growth. I just do not see
how an alteration of the present fed funds rate is going to contribute
to an improved outlook, and I think it could very well contribute to
instability rather than stability.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. First, I have some comments from a District
perspective. Traveling around the Fourth District and getting
acquainted with bankers and business people all over the area, I'm
most often meeting people for the first time.
It's been very helpful,
very instructive.
In manufacturing, which is very important in the
District, the general sense is that things are improving modestly.
The headlines will be something like "British Petroleum lays off 300."
That's front page news.
But Ford Motor Company recalling 800 or
planning to add another 800 doesn't make the news; or Goodyear,
Reliance Electric, or Piedmont Corporation adding workers, if it shows
up at all, is back on the third or fourth page or buried well inside

6/30-7/1/92

-23-

the paper. When I talk to business people about their own views they
tend to convey a sense of "well, we're doing a little better but we're
worried about the national economy."
And they're worried about the
national economy either because of the budget deficit or because of
national politics and concern about what kind of leadership we have,
believing that the long-run outlook for the economy depends very much
But they
on political leadership rather than institutional factors.
do not reconcile in a way that's clear to me what they are seeing or
feeling as they personalize their own businesses with what they think
about the economy at large. The retailers comment about how slow
sales have been and usually attribute that to weather, which carries
with it, of course, the expectation that sales are going to pick up
So they could easily be disappointed if better
with better weather.
weather comes and they don't see sales and order books picking up.
When I quiz people about their inflation outlook,
consistently manufacturers and retailers say that it's not a question
How do we
of inflation, it's a question of deflation. They ask:
But they think that the
manage stable prices or a decline in prices?
Very rarely do
national inflation rate is going to be 4 or 5 percent.
I find somebody who is talking about something less than 4 percent
over a 5- to 10-year horizon, even though in their own businesses they
don't expect to be able to increase prices.
So there is a disparity
[between] what they face or feel they are contending with and this
When I ask why they don't believe us about going to
national [view].
price stability and what that world would be like in terms of interest
rates and other things, they often cite the budget deficit or national
politics or [what they see as] the outlook for easy money-- that sort
of thing. There is no real substance to why they feel that way.
We see strong
A few other comments on sectoral developments:
increases in bookings at hotels throughout the District; the
convention business in the Fourth District is really doing quite well,
maybe in part because it didn't have a boom so it didn't have a bust
When I try to elicit sympathy
and kind of moved right through this.
for how tough things are in southern California where I'm from, I get
[Laughter]
There
no sympathy at all. They think it's well deserved!
have been reports of a pickup in residential activity throughout the
District; we're seeing some new home starts pretty well throughout the
whole area.
One banker reported commercial lending up 12 percent
year-over-year; he happens to be in an area where Ford Motor Company
is recalling workers and adding workers. That's balanced off against
bankers in the more agricultural areas expressing concern about a
third year of drought; [they say] they're going to be getting a lot of
keys if we do have a third year of drought.
But they have carried
[the farmers] this long; they need rain and there's nothing they can
do about that.
When I talk to bankers about interest rates and inflation,
consistently without exception they talk about higher interest rates
and higher inflation. I asked them why we don't see more growth in
They say it's because their customers
time certificates of deposits.
are waiting for higher rates and don't want to get locked in. Why are
[They reply that] when we get the
they waiting for higher rates?
higher inflation, we're going to get higher interest rates. And I
asked them why they don't tell their customers that that is not going
to happen.
They say because it is going to happen; we are going to
get higher interest rates because we'll get higher inflation as soon

6/30-7/1/92

-24-

as we get [more economic] growth. I've asked them to consider a world
in which we have roughly stable inflation and what that means and what
they're going to pay on their checkable deposits and their regular
savings--what it was like, say, in the early 1960s.
And they simply
say they don't believe it [will happen]; they're not willing to lower
checkable rates or regular savings rates and make their customers,
especially their older generation customers, unhappy because they will
just have to raise them again as soon as growth picks up or as soon as
inflation picks up.
Turning to the national economy, I don't disagree
significantly with the Greenbook. I guess I would be a little more
optimistic on real growth--on the higher end of the [Committee
members'] range--but not any different at all, really, on the
inflation outlook for the near term. The comment that Mike made about
capital goods was consistent with what I heard throughout the
District; I heard the same kind of phrase about the pickup in capital
goods being far from spectacular. Most of our capital goods suppliers
say they are getting more orders; the transplant plants especially are
picking up business from the foreign producers and taking back
domestic markets.
But they all would characterize it as "not
spectacular growth."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
Well, I don't have much to say this time so
I'll probably talk longer than usual! For me there is an issue of
risk which has intensified since the last meeting. There's no
question about the point that Gary Stern raised:
When you look at our
forecasts, they look better than last time or roughly in line.
For
the first quarter we expected growth to be around zero and it was 2.7
percent; at least, I think it's settled on 2.7 percent now. The
concern is about the pattern, obviously--the pattern of a surge early
in the year followed by deterioration on the spending side--and that
raises questions about sustainability. Housing has clearly lost
momentum and there's also concern about retail sales.
Auto sales have
held up, but I wonder if that's not due to the age of the fleet and
some replacement demand or quality effects of American autos. Export
growth also has slowed and we do have industrial production coming in
[slightly higher] now. As Ed Boehne pointed out, the key is whether
that feeds in through job growth to stabilize the situation. We're
now projecting a couple of quarters of growth of around 2 percent.
There's some question in my mind of a stalling here. Given the
spending outlook, I think the chances are perhaps 1 in 3 that we'll
have a couple of quarters of growth below 2 percent and that indeed
the unemployment rate, instead of stalling, might well move up toward
8 percent with a couple of quarters below 2 percent.
I think there
are risks here.
There are risks to the institution.
I wonder how good a job
we've done in selling our goal of price stability, and I wonder how
widely shared it is within the body politic and the American public.
And I would just as soon not test that too strongly in the current
environment. I think there are risks also of instability and damage
to our long-term objective.
If we don't make a move and indeed we do
get some bad news, I think we'll feel compelled to take more
aggressive actions down the road. The hallmark of the success of the
price stability program has been gradualism, and there might be

6/30-7/1/92

-25-

concern about instability. On the other side, I see the upside risk
as 4 percent growth; and with this degree of slack in the economy, I
don't think the consequences for inflation are all that troubling. I
do think there are businesses out there that would be relieved of the
vise of several years of really tough demand considerations and who
might try to increase prices. So, I wouldn't entirely discount some
inflation consequences.
It does seem to me, though, that compared to
last time the downside risks have increased.
It's less clear to me how we should respond.
There's no
question that the problems of the economy have not been caused by
monetary policy, and it's not clear how much monetary policy can do to
help at this stage. But we are facing weak money and I'm afraid
increasing signs of weakness in the real economy.
And as the central
bank most people view us as responsible for money growth. M2 is
certainly distorted; but, as has been pointed out, the debt aggregates
are also weak and even M1 has started to decelerate. Even with the
distorted M2, I can't help but suspect that the dramatic collapse we
had a few months ago contained some information about what was
happening to consumer demand. I guess we'll talk more about this
tomorrow.
Of course, we could say that ease would have no effect; I
think that's a tougher case to sell after the ease late last year and
the surge in spending. Our staff would call that Grainger causation;
others might call it coincidence.
[Laughter]
But I think the economy
was poised for that response in the sense that [our easing actions]
from October through December unleashed refinancings and put spendable
cash in people's pockets and helped with that spending spree.
Moreover, I think [further easing now] would result in a reduction in
the prime rate and would increase cash flows.
I doubt that it would
unleash a wave of new borrowing. Governor LaWare's alma mater,
Chemical Bank, reduced its prime a bit for a while and stood prepared
to be trampled by credit-starved borrowers, and I think we can infer
that it was lonely out there. I do think [an easing action] would
help on the cash flow side. We could say there are inflation risks
with easing.
I think we're pretty much on record as saying that the
pressures on inflation are easing, and I doubt that there's a strong
case that we'd do much to reverse them; the fundamentals are well in
place. But, again, it's not without cost.
There is concern about the
long rate.
Consistently as information has come out which increases
the probability of ease, that long rate has moved down and vice versa.
That doesn't mean, though, that actual ease would not result in the
long rate going up because then the critics actually would come out of
the woodwork and start talking. But empirically I wonder about that
So, I guess I see zero M2 growth in the context of building
argument.
It's
evidence of decelerating spending and that makes me nervous.
hard for me to believe that this economy is money starved.
Nonetheless, the liquidity is really hanging it back. We've had some
help already:
some effective ease from a dollar that is down 8
percent from its peak in March; a long bond rate that is down 25 basis
points since March; and a mortgage rate that is down 50 basis points
since March. Moreover, late last summer I thought real short rates
were a bit high.
I think that's no longer the case. The [federal
funds] rate has come down 200 basis points since last summer; market
Bank rates
rates are low in real terms at about 0 to 1/2 percent.
still remain high in real terms, it seems to me, and a move may help
there.

-26-

6/30-7/1/92

I'm also mindful of the need to save a little ammunition for
adverse contingencies.
In my view we have very little left in our
arsenal with which to face an equity market packed with former bank CD
investors who didn't like 3 percent returns; they'll be receiving
their second-quarter mutual fund statements shortly showing a negative
3 percent return. We may have a better test of the wealth effects of
market crashes out of this one.
Indeed, I think the equity funds in
the last couple of months have shown net outflows for the first time.
It also may be wise to save a little fire power considering the
prospect of a hung presidential election and three months of
uncertainty on the impact on the stock market. And of course in that
event the dollar may well fall out of bed, which may hurt our ability
to respond.
So, overall, the situation is pretty complex and I am
concerned as every day passes that the chances increase that we're
going to have to face another mini-dip. It seems to me the argument
for considering a move is that it would do some substantive good, do
relatively little harm, and would show responsiveness to economic
risk. There are also arguments for holding tight and there are risks
associated with that.
To a certain extent a lot of [the problem] is
illustrated by the colloquy that Jerry Jordan had with Mike Prell on
this troubling sense in which price stability is linked, rightly or
wrongly, to the tolerance for unemployment or bad economic
circumstances.
I think Mike is correct:
This view is abroad in the
land or at least in the local vicinity.
[Laughter]
And if we hold
tight, I think we should feel pretty comfortable about weathering the
adverse outcomes that could occur, which include a couple of quarters
of growth below 2 percent and the possibility of a higher unemployment
rate.
I think we should go into that with our eyes open, willing to
absorb these outcomes without having responded to developing signs of
deceleration. We certainly can't do anything about the second
quarter; we have little time left--six and one-half hours!
[Laughter]
We would I guess be expected to show responsiveness to the patterns of
weakness that have been developing and we could take out a little
insurance on the third quarter. We could wait and try to respond
later. My view is that we're running out of time here and in this
environment it only gets tougher to act.
Maybe I'm too pessimistic;
the odds are still favorable that we're going to scrape by this
situation. But in golfing terms, I think it's a pretty tough lie;
we're not in the sand trap and we're certainly not in the lake, but we
may be in the rough looking at a possible "bogey" as they say.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's not too bad.

SPEAKER(?).

If it's a bogey, I'll settle for that any day.

SPEAKER(?).

Or a double bogey.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, although I have read all the memos
and listened to the various theories expounded, I don't claim to
understand the refusal of M2 to respond to an established pattern of
stimuli.
It's as though Pavlov's dog had his saliva glands dry up!
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's a triple bogey!

6/30-7/1/92

-27-

MR. LAWARE.
And no matter how loud and long Pavlov rang his
bell the dog wouldn't drool.
Something has to be different. I
believe it is an unprecedented conjunction of discomfiture on the part
of bankers, consumers, and businessmen. Businesses won't borrow for
inventory because they lack rapidly growing sales; and they are
reluctant to borrow at current rates for plant expansion or equipment
replacement because they can't discern what the future holds.
Besides, they're still paying off the economically unproductive debt
Consumers are
they undertook in the '80s for buy-outs and takeovers.
intimidated by unemployment statistics--daily reports of corporate
layoffs not only of white collar and blue collar workers but of top
executives--and the still formidable task of paying off the debt that
they incurred in the '80s. Bankers who have been badly savaged by
examiners are just beginning to realize how much worse it's going to
be under the wonderful FDIC Improvement Act.
The very fact that they
have not moved the prime as a pricing strategy to attract loans
indicates a reluctance to lend at all, even to the best risks. And,
of course, demand for credit is anemic. Add to all of that the
prevailing public impression that the nation is adrift with no clear
sense of direction and one can understand this discomfiture.
If these conclusions are accurate, then it is hard for me to
see what effect we could expect to have from a further easing of
policy. To the contrary, in my view there are some recognizable
risks, including a further weakening of the dollar, higher long-term
rates based on the conviction that further ease is inflationary, and
finally the concern that we are pursuing a political course following
public jawboning from the Administration. M2 has not responded to our
previous moves and it is hard to reason that it will suddenly come
I think we need more time to see where [the economy is]
back to heel.
And I don't see that the threat
headed before we make a policy move.
of immediate collapse is real enough to justify a tilt toward ease at
this time.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Kelley.

I thought that was an eagle, myself!

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, my comments might follow pretty
closely along the lines set by Governor Mullins and Governor LaWare.
reconcile

If you can
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, wait a second.
[those two sets of comments], that's a double eagle!

MR. KELLEY.
Well, I think I came out understanding where
Governor LaWare is but I'm not sure I came out understanding where
At any rate, we've had
Governor Mullins is, at least at this moment.
our usual extensive and excellent economic analyses and it seems that
But it's a frail
we probably have a recovery pretty firmly in place.
Policy
child and there's certainly some risk that it could falter.
setting would be a whole lot easier if things were either better or
worse.
If [the economy] were recovering smartly, we'd pretty well
know what to do; or if it were faltering badly, we'd probably know
But we're in a broad gray zone here where we have
what we should do.
a slow, tentative, stop-and-start situation that is hard to read.
That leads me to ask myself three questions, which I can share with
you. If that's where we are--in the slow, tentative gray zone--the
What is appropriate for the central bank to try to
first question is:
do about it?
Secondly, if we do wish to try to solidify [the

6/30-7/1/92

-28-

And
recovery] or accelerate it, what is the best way to do that?
thirdly, whatever policy we put in place, what are its likely longterm effects?
On the first question of what is appropriate, I think this
Committee and the central bank have several responsibilities. The
most basic one, a view I think we probably all share, is to foster and
maintain the integrity of the financial system and its currency.
Then, of course, if the nation ever got into a crisis--a world war or
something like that--we would have to do whatever it was necessary to
I think we also
do, no matter what, under circumstances like that.
have a responsibility to try to ensure that we don't strangle the
economy for lack of money and achieve price level stability by
rendering the economy comatose. We could probably do that, but that's
So, if we do have a slow economy right now,
obviously not desirable.
I think we ought to ask ourselves if it is because we've followed an
inappropriately tight money policy. And it seems to me that the
There is plenty of liquidity
answer to that is fairly clearly "no."
in the system. We've all talked a lot about loan demand and so forth;
it just seems pretty obvious to me that the sluggishness we're dealing
with does not have its origin in overly tight monetary policy.
So, we
probably are meeting our responsibilities there, at least so far and
in the short run.
Beyond that, it gets pretty murky as to what is
appropriate for the central bank to try to do. The conclusion that I
come to on my first question is that we're not in a situation that
forces the central bank to put at risk its basic responsibility to the
financial system of maintaining its integrity. Surely, we want to do
But I
what is appropriate to help the economy in any way that we can.
think it's important that we do that without unduly running a risk to
our primary responsibility.
If we do decide that we want
Turning to the second question:
to try to do something to accelerate the expansion through monetary
policy, what is the best way to do it?
If we ease policy, we do that
against the background of all this financial restructuring that is
I
going on, which we all understand and have talked about a lot.
If we
think it's critically important that it work its way through.
do ease policy, clearly we would probably get a lower prime rate; but
I'm not at all clear that that would help loan demand or make very
Would it be a big
much of a difference, given this other [situation].
I haven't seen any suggestion that
boost to the monetary aggregates?
that might happen. And it's very possible that it might be
counterproductive in the sense that it could drive up long-term rates.
If it did, it seems to me very likely that that would more than offset
So, the conclusion I come to on
any beneficial effects we might get.
that question is that the chances are at least 50/50 that the best way
to help this economy, if our number one wish is to help the economy,
is to stand pat.
On the third question of what are the likely long-term
effects of any policy either way:
If we stand pat and don't change, I
agree that it is certainly not riskless, as has been pointed out here.
But I think the rewards that we could reap if we did stand pat and it
If we ease now, I see several
worked out are very substantial indeed.
risks that could ensue from that. A couple of them have a pretty low
probability; the third may have a little higher probability. The low
but I think non-zero probability is that we could set up [conditions]
for an inflationary surge down the road.
If we were to ease and

6/30-7/1/92

-29-

should that cause a very severe deterioration in the value of the
dollar and possibly unleash an incipient credit explosion, that could
require a monetary policy response that would be destabilizing down
That could cause some fairly radical kinds of upset to the
the road.
Maybe a little higher probability would be that we
process over time.
would succeed in what we wanted to do in accelerating the economy and
in the process abort this restructuring process before it has a chance
to work its way all the way through. That would be very unfortunate
in the sense that it would almost surely set [the stage for] a renewed
weakness in the economy very shortly and it could possibly get us into
a new downturn prematurely. Perhaps a higher probability and a
concern that I have would be in the area of Federal Reserve
We could
credibility. Our credibility may be on the line right here.
do ourselves some serious long-term damage if we were to ease and if,
however inaccurately, the market perceived that we were pandering to
politics or that we were putting a premium on growth at any cost even
if we had to accept a devaluation of the currency and the financial
I think we might
That could be very unfortunate.
system to get it.
be in a very important time right now in terms of testing our
credibility. If it's very clear that the wheels are coming off the
economy and that things are going south, then I think we probably
would have to ease and the markets would understand that and would not
fault us for it long term. But if an easing is seen as some kind of
panic or a response to political pressure or what people would
perceive as mistaken priorities, then I think our credibility would
And that would make our job down the
have had it for a long time.
If we're able to stand our ground here and
road much, much tougher.
the economy struggles on through, which seems to me to be the most
likely possibility, that could be a very, very major boost to our
So, on balance, Mr.
credibility and pay us huge dividends over time.
Chairman, I come down for now, subject to how events unfold, saying
that standing pat is our best bet to help the economy short term and
long term.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me just start with the national
The forecast that the gentlemen and
outlook in terms of the forecast.
ladies in New York put together this time is virtually identical to
Mike's forecast, not just in terms of the totals but even the
As a matter of fact, you could put a postage stamp on the
components.
From my point of
two of them and cover them both in all the details.
view, given all the structural problems that people have been talking
about, if the results over the next six quarters through the end of
I
1993 were in line with those forecasts, I'd be a very happy fellow.
would also point out that in Mike's forecast the cumulative growth
rate in real GNP for the years 1992 and 1993 combined is to the
decimal point equal to the 2-year growth rate in the price stability
So, there's no conflict whatsoever [between]
scenario in Chart 17.
the forecast, if you want to believe that chart to that level of
detail, and this notion of price stability.
How does one feel about
But the question, of course, is:
I have to say that I share the views that have
achieving that result?
been expressed by a number of members in that I am uneasy about
achieving that result. The point has been made at least by a number
of people that the problem is this sustainability question and the
lack of any clear momentum in the economy; there's a sense [that the

6/30-7/1/92

-30-

recovery] just doesn't want to take hold.
The anecdotal comments that
I get from businesses, small and large, are virtually without
exception consistent with that concern about sustainability, momentum,
etc.; it's a lot like Ed Boehne's characterization of the situation.
Now, the one thing that we do hear anecdotally that is different, even
from small businesses, is that the banks are out beating the bushes
looking for business. And this is the first time we've heard that on
any kind of systematic basis. But even where they're looking for
business, it isn't there. However, they do tell us now of calling
officers back on the road and of banks running seminars in various
parts of the state, and that's a change, clearly.
In terms of where we go from here, Ed Boehne put his finger
on it as far as I'm concerned:
The crucial variable in terms of
hitting something close to that forecast is the employment/income side
of the equation in a context where, Wayne, we at least don't have the
saving rate going down. At the beginning of the year one could
roughly visualize income streams compatible with that forecast with
rather modest growth in employment--65,000 to 75,000 a month-throughout the year.
But we've lost ground relative to that.
To be
sure, some of it has been made up in income terms by [increased]
hours, but the fact of the matter is that employment in Q1 was lower
than in Q4 of last year and, if I have this roughly right--again using
Mike's forecast--Q2 payroll employment in the forecast is something
like 400,000 higher than Q1.
Obviously, it's going to take a pretty
healthy increase [in June] to get anything like that.
The question
really in some ways does come down to:
Will the employment growth and
income growth be there that can produce enough by way of spending,
given the structural problems, to get an outcome that roughly
resembles the forecast?
On M2, I've never worried too much about it, but I think we
can explain a lot of that [weakness].
But, again, the point has been
made by a couple of people that it's not just M2.
If we look at the
broadest measures of credit, we still find this systematic weakness.
We can explain a lot of that away, too, by the debt restructuring and
the necessary consequences of all the problems in the 1980s.
But if
that continuing pattern of very sluggish growth in any M out to M27
continues in a context in which the economy begins to fall short of
the forecast, it's going to be pretty hard for anybody to dance to
that tune.
Again, I don't think the question in any sense is:
Should we
be trying to accelerate the economy relative to something like the
[staff's] forecast?
As I said, I'd be as happy as a clam if we got a
result that was even roughly like that forecast.
But I come back to
Si Keehn's comment a long time ago--3-1/2 hours ago or something like
that:
What if it turns out that instead of looking at a 2-1/2 percent
economy we find ourselves looking at a 1-1/2 percent economy?
And in
terms of this argument about Fed credibility, which I think cuts both
ways, if it turns out that we have a 1-1/2 percent economy and that's
what we're responding to, then there's going to be a big problem in
terms of Fed credibility on the other side.
This is as difficult a policy setting as I can remember in a
long, long time.
I think Mike Kelley had it right:
It would be a
heck of a lot easier if the economy were either a lot better or a lot
worse. But I do think the crucial question is not whether to seek an

-31-

6/30-7/1/92

acceleration of the economy relative to the forecast but where one's
comfort zone is as to whether we can either hit the forecast or come
And I'd have to say that my degree of
within striking distance of it.
comfort in terms of our ability to hit the forecast has waned from
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
where it was a couple of months ago.
Mr. Chairman, as a point of clarification, so
MR. PRELL.
that people know on Thursday [when the employment data are released]
what the surprise is relative to our forecast, I think the Vice
Chairman had the disadvantage of looking at some rounded quarterly
average numbers. Actually, what we have for June is only an 80,000
increase in payroll employment.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. PRELL.

For June?

Right.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I was talking about the quarterly

average.
MR. PRELL.
quarter average.

The quarterly average is 400,000 above the first-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. What I'd like to do is to summarize briefly
what I think I have learned since our last meeting in May. It is
summed up well in the aggregate; that is, I think the staff have very
well assimilated all the data that came out into their forecast.
While quantitatively the forecast reflects some modest weakening, we
still have a 2 percent quarter projected for the second quarter and
Those downward revisions
some minor downward revisions in the future.
anticipate that real GDP at the end of the second quarter next year
And
will be about $14-1/2 billion lower than [projected previously].
I think that's a fairly good summation of how much weakening we've
seen. Although I call that a modest quantitative weakening, I'm
somewhat concerned about the qualitative weakening that lies behind
the numbers. Personal consumption expenditures will be about $20
Contrast that with a rise in inventories of $12
billion lower.
billion.
I think what we've seen is a more modest quantitative
reduction that masks a substantial qualitative weakening in the
economy. Much of the growth that is there is moving away from final
demand and is moving toward business accumulation of inventories and
faster business investment. That very well may come to pass, but we
Inventories and
are gambling, I think, on a riskier scenario.
investment are necessarily riskier components of demand than is
something like consumption. Quantitatively, that involves something
like 170,000 fewer houses, 13 percent less, and payroll employment
that's about 650,000 less or about 0.6 of a percent of the work force.
So, that's the magnitude. And I think it sums up well the amount of
I'd also
weakening we've seen in the economy since the last forecast.
point out that the anecdotal information we have gathered here today
suggests that the quarter has ended on a weaker note than it began.
We were all somewhat more sanguine about the economic forecast at the
last meeting than we are now, and the anecdotal evidence from around
the country suggests that in fact the economy is weakening in June
relative to what it was earlier.

6/30-7/1/92

The second set of data that we've learned is that we've had
two tests of market reaction to what I would call basically "monetary
policy developments."
The first came immediately after the last FOMC
meeting on May 19 with the publication in The Wall Street Journal of
the Wessel piece which described our reaction as having been one of
going toward symmetry. At the close on May 21, the 1-year note was up
25 basis points, the 3-year note was up 30 basis points, the 10-year
note was up 19 basis points, and the 30-year bond was up 9 basis
points on the publication of the Wessel story. That is one test--and
I admit no test is perfect--of how the market responded to our
presumed decision to go with a symmetric directive rather than the
asymmetric directive that preceded it.
The other economic test came
last Wednesday when the President had his interview with The New York
Times and the paper published what is obviously rather public pressure
on us to [ease].
The 1-year rate fell 11 basis points, the 3-year
rate fell 11 basis points, the 10-year 5 basis points, and the 30-year
2 basis points. So, I think that gives us some idea of the likely
market reaction to what we might do.
Those are the two economic
things I think we've learned.
The political lesson we've learned is one that I wish we
hadn't learned.
I was privileged to be able to meet with the Reserve
Bank presidents up in Baltimore and I predicted that we were going to
be coming under increasing political risk.
I think the Chairman
mentioned that earlier in his comments.
Well, I think we saw the
political risk in the President's comments.
Frankly, I didn't like it
much. So, this weekend I began contemplating how we might respond to
that political risk.
If this were Saturday, I might be quite tempted
to want to stand strong in spite of what I think is evidence of
weakening economic activity. Governor Kelley pointed out some key
advantages to our standing [firm].
I couldn't imagine a better test
for us to establish credibility. We have not only a Presidential
statement but since the Beltway is within the Fifth District and I've
worked there, I've studied the matter rather closely. This was a very
unusual development for this Administration. They got everybody
together to give background interviews.
So, it was a pretty public
act of pressure on us.
We'd clearly establish credibility if we stood
tall.
Second, there have been arguments around the table which may
have merit--but on balance I think they're probably wrong, though I'm
quite uncertain about my own views--that we might be at a juncture, an
unusual juncture, where an increase in short rates may actually help
M2 growth. The idea there is that we would stop the runoff into
nonbank depositories.
And as someone who is very concerned about M2,
although I don't agree with that description of the sign of the
elasticity, I'm willing to admit that I might be wrong. I couldn't
imagine a better [time] to experiment than right now [and to be]
wrong. And thirdly, standing tall might have another advantage.
It's
amazing when I go out [in public] that everyone thinks we know
something that nobody else does.
Given the amount of disagreement
around this table, it's unclear that we know anything, but they all
think we know something that nobody else does. And perhaps a sign of
strength on our part might be a signal that in fact the economy is
recovering; it may be a self-fulfilling prophecy that might get things
going.

6/30-7/1/92

-33-

So, I think the political lesson is that we are at an unusual
juncture. Were we to stand tall--perhaps we could even raise rates
and, who knows, really show our independence--we might produce some
We might have a tremendous bond market rally
very desirable results.
I have to view that as a long
and that could get the economy going.
shot, though. But it's a long shot with a high payoff. I haven't
played golf in 15 years, so I'm not going to get into golf analogies
Would
but it would sound to me a bit like shooting a double eagle.
I'm a more conservative player and I think our real
that make sense?
risks are very much along the lines of what President Corrigan said.
We're not being asked to hit a
And I think we have to get it right.
home run or a hole-in-one, but we are being asked to get a par, not a
bogey. On net I would have to go back to my economic training and to
what I think were both market tests to our behavior and also the
overall weakening that's epitomized in the change in the staff
forecast.
I would be inclined as a result of that to reject my
instincts to act tough and do what the economy says to me, and that is
I'd be inclined to ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Well, I think I'm batting clean-up again. I'm
going to change the analogy a bit because I feel as if we're running
both the top and the bottom of the ninth inning at one time and the
In any case, I certainly agree with
bases are loaded on both sides.
the Greenbook forecast of a slow, modest, sluggish recovery. One of
the things that seems to have changed since last time is the question
of how long this period of sluggishness is likely to continue. The
longer it goes on, the more I am starting to question whether or not
we're going to start to lose consumers at some point and a slowdown
will begin.
[Various] drags on the economy have been identified--the
[financial] restructuring and the operating restructuring; the defense
restructuring is really only getting started at this point. We're
While the confidence indexes
starting to see a fall-off in demand.
look better, as Mike indicated, they're still below their high points.
I tend to wonder whether when people respond to the confidence
surveyors they say one thing but when they respond to the political
surveyors they say another thing, and thus we have a three-way race at
The international side has started to weaken and, of
this point.
course, state and local government constraints may be starting to come
in.
I am encouraged about the progress on inflation. I tend to
wonder whether the concentration on the CPI or even the core CPI is
perhaps overstating the price pressures that people are really feeling
given this inability to raise prices, the bargain or sales shopping,
So, I'm a little more encouraged about
and so on that are going on.
price pressures than perhaps concentration on the CPI might indicate.
The study and analysis of the monetary aggregates that we all
appear to have engaged in since the last time do help to explain,
partially, what has been happening in the monetary aggregates. And
I wonder whether the banks, instead of
that I think is helpful.
aggressively bidding for deposits, are now out making loans; I wonder
if they're really out building their CRA files instead of spending
time on loan development. In any case, we're not seeing the credit
expansion.
So, I think we understand a bit more about the monetary
Nevertheless, we're still seeing weakness in those
aggregates.
Again, if we concentrate only on looking at the Ms in the
aggregates.
short run we may not know too much, but in the long run I do think

6/30-7/1/92

-34-

they tell us something. And we're having a [relatively] long period
of weakness in those aggregates, so I think that is disturbing.
I do
agree with Presidents Boehne and Corrigan that the key is employment
growth.
And to the extent we have slow GDP growth--if it does drop
down below 2 percent for an extended period of time--we're going to
have some problems seeing sustained growth.
So, while things haven't
changed a lot substantively since the last time, it does seem to me
that the length of time and the cumulating effect are heightening the
downside risk.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much. We've come to a
break for the day; our next session commences at 9:00 a.m. tomorrow.
[Meeting recessed]

-35-

6/30-7/1/92

July 1, 1992--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Shall we move on to the next item on the
agenda which is the long-run ranges for monetary policy?
I will call
on Don Kohn to make his presentation.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Don?

MR. PARRY. The staff projections are certainly very
important in terms of which of these alternatives should be selected.
Typically in the past I think the way you have handled projections was
that you took the difference between the actual and the forecast and
had that difference decay over the forecast period as an error.
Judging from the discussion, I take it you're assuming that the error
persists at the same level.
Or do you have a different rate of decay?
How did you get such a low number?
MR. KOHN. Well, basically we assumed that the forces acting
to raise velocity in the first half of the year would persist over the
second half of the year.
So, for example, relative to our standard
money demand model, which has been missing for two years now, we
assumed further shifts. Looking out to '93, and if we were to look
out further than that, I think we might assume that the additional
shifts would taper off; but we would not be tempted to assume that the
level of velocity would tend to come back to what it was before. That
is, if you interpret this as basically a shrinking of the depository
system for one reason or another, as I think the memo to the Committee
noted, some of that shrinkage might be a temporary reaction to the
problems of the past. But I think a lot of it must be permanent. The
safety nets are being priced differently and people view depositories
differently. So one wouldn't expect the level of velocity to come
back, say, to the old P* [assumption] but-MR. PARRY.

So there's a different structure?

MR. KOHN. I think it is a different structure. Clearly, one
could imagine without too much trouble that at some point in here
growth rates will come back into alignment and that the growth of the
monetary aggregates and the growth of nominal spending will move
together again in a relatively predictable way.
But I rather doubt
that the level would adjust back, and there's a lot of uncertainty
about growth rates in the interim.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Bob Parry's question raised something that has
been on my mind for some time.
I think there are two ways to look at
these intermediate targets, or the long-term targets as we call them
now. One is that they are in fact medium-term targets. The other
extreme is to set these where we think the aggregates are going to be
and not really think of them as targets.
I think what Don has said is
that the reason he has suggested lower [growth rates] is that he
thinks they are reasonable targets because of the downward shift in
the demand for money that we've seen, which makes [lower growth]
perfectly justifiable. But I think it's a trap we can easily get

6/30-7/1/92

-36-

into:
setting these where we think they're going to be rather than
where we think they ought to be.
I'm very much in favor of choosing
targets and making the aggregates behave the way we think they ought
to rather than just putting these out.
I think the staff has done a
very fine job in a very difficult environment in setting forth the
numbers that we have here.
And I think Don would agree with what I'm
saying.
MR. KOHN. I would want to be clear though, President Black,
that we have made our forecast based on the Greenbook projection for
nominal income.
So, if that projection is anything like what the
Committee wants it to be, then we would say that the monetary growth
you ought to want is something in the neighborhood of our projection,
with this huge margin of uncertainty around all those things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions?

MR. ANGELL. Don, when economic variables don't behave as our
background and our history suggest they should behave, it seems to me
that we may have a tendency to think too soon that there will be a
return to the standard or what we would call "normal." Let me ask you
what you think the risks are that this [unusual] behavior of M2 and
its velocity has not yet peaked. What is the risk that M2 growth
might be even lower and V2 might be even higher than you anticipate?
The reason I'm asking is because a 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent range is
pretty close [on the low side].
It doesn't do what Bob Black
suggests, does it?
That is, it doesn't really move the range down so
that we center it on 2 percent.
So, my question is:
What is the
probability that M2 growth might be substantially lower than 2 percent
and V2 substantially higher?
MR. KOHN. Well, we've set our [M2] projection, we hope, with
the risk balanced on both sides. Now, as Bob Parry remarked, we did
lower it quite a bit this time relative to where we were last time; in
the February Bluebook I think we had 3-1/2 percent [M2 growth], or
roughly the same as nominal GDP.
So, we've gone from 3-1/2 to 2
percent in stages. Quite frankly, my thinking was influenced a lot by
the expectation of a bounceback by May and June; we didn't get it.
In
fact, we are getting quite a bit of weakness and that has caused me to
reevaluate this relationship, assuming that the economy has expanded
as we expected over those months. So, we made this downward revision.
I think we have it centered more or less in this wide sort of very
flat probability fan there.
I couldn't say that there's no
probability that we would have higher velocity; of course, we could
have larger velocity increases. At the same time, one issue here is
how the Committee wants to treat the possibility of even lower M2
growth, i.e., how worried it should get about M2 or even M1 and
whether to put a little weight on that.
While I would put the
probabilities of a greater velocity increase as obviously not zero,
the Committee needs to consider how closely it wants to examine its
federal funds rate target if money comes in weaker because it might be
telling us something as well.
MR. ANGELL. No, I wasn't suggesting that you weren't
balanced; I was just suggesting that if you were projecting 5 percent
growth and we had a range of 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent, that a miss on
one side would be a more serious--

6/30-7/1/92

-37-

So, the fact that the range wasn't
MR. KOHN. Oh, I see.
reduced even further to center it around 2 percent is what you're
reacting to?
I would be historically at least
MR. ANGELL. Well, no.
But I think you've
close enough to Bob Black not to want to do that.
answered the question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. My question was the question that Wayne Angell
asked.
It was concern about the fact that we don't know when the
correlation of errors is going to break and in which direction, and
you answered it absolutely as well as it can be answered.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.
I have two questions. One is particularly to
help me understand some of the terminology. Would you say a little
more about what you meant when you started off about using the
Aggregates have been used as
aggregates as an information variable?
an indicator in two different senses:
sometimes to underline the
thrust of monetary policy actions influencing economic activity and
sometimes as a more timely indicator of information about what is
going on in economic activity compared to national income account
information or other reports.
Is there a tendency on the part of the
staff at this point to go one way or the another as to how you use
these as indicators?
MR. KOHN. No. As I tried to indicate here, I would say that
I tend to use them a little both ways.
In some sense, in terms of the
current situation, we have other information coming in about hours
worked and retail sales and this, that, and the other thing. So, the
lead [time] of money [supply data] over that information, although
it's subject to revision, isn't that great.
It might give us a little
sense that things were developing somewhat differently than expected
but we have a lot of other information coming in.
So, I give it some
weight that way. But the other issue is whether there are some
forward-looking properties to it; and I think in the past there have
been, although they have been rather loose.
I think money
encapsulates both our actions and the demands coming from the market,
and one can see influences on them before one sees the influences in
the economy. So, in terms of this leading indicator property, I'd
differentiate money from, say, the way we treated it from 1979 to 1982
when M1 was the direct target of the Committee and we moved the
federal funds rate around very vigorously in a semi-automatic way in
reaction to deviations in money growth from the path.
Clearly, since
the fall of 1982 it has been more of an information-indicator type
variable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Don?
Let me
raise an issue which is more than tactics.
The issue is how to handle
the problem that we have. I think the staff paper is extraordinarily
good; I certainly agree with Jerry on that.
It pulled together most
of the crucial issues that have been discussed around this table for
quite a while. I conclude from that paper as well as other
observations that for the moment M2 is a proxy for the financing of a
system that is clearly broken down. I don't deny that it probably

6/30-7/1/92

-38-

still has some shadow effect that we don't know the aggregate
dimensions of, but the regressions that were employed to separate the
different types of money are regressions of a model or series of
models, all of which are unchanged over historic periods. Now, we do
know that M2 has been falling off the charts in the last couple of
years; indeed, a lot of things have. The question we have to ask
ourselves [relates to] the underlying assumption we're making--namely,
that the structure that we're endeavoring to measure econometrically
is unchanged.
If it is changed, then obviously one can't make any
assumptions even about the nature of the adjusted effects of M2.
This
is an issue that I suspect we're going to be looking at for a number
of months. With the degree of focus that we are giving to it, I would
gather that we're going to learn more as we go on, as indeed I think
the evaluation of the more complex opportunity cost functions has
demonstrated.
We will learn things if for no other reason than we
will get more observations in this very crucial period, which will
tell us about how nominal gross domestic product works its way through
the intermediation process to M2-type components.
This puts us in a very peculiar position only because we have
a Humphrey-Hawkins testimony in front of us.
I would gather that if
that were not the case, we would be somewhat more relaxed at this
point about how we're going to handle this.
So, unless somebody can
find a better idea--and I must admit there are not great ones around-let me at least suggest as a fallback position that if we can't find
anything better that essentially we communicate all of this discussion
to the Congress.
I suggest we say we are working on it and we will
keep them informed in a written form or something of that nature.
We
will send them an interim report on our progress, which could be every
quarter or what have you, and proceed not to change anything [at this
meeting].
In other words, I'm suggesting that we not change the 1992
ranges and effectively pro forma allow the 1993 ranges to be the same
as the 1992 ranges.
I suggest that only because if we do anything
other than that, we are presupposing that we have some knowledge about
what is going on, which we don't have.
So, we are caught in this
dilemma where if we make any changes at all it would be on the basis
of an insight we're professing to have, which at this moment I suggest
we don't have.
I don't feel comfortable with this as a conclusion; it
means more work for Don. He doesn't even flinch; [maybe] he isn't
listening!
[Laughter]
But unless somebody can think of a better
tactical procedure with respect to how we handle this....
I'm not
talking about the more important questions of what it does and how we
interlace policy. The issue of how we relate policy to the monetary
aggregates is something we're going to be struggling with on a very
intense basis for the period ahead, Humphrey-Hawkins to the contrary
notwithstanding. But I was raising this collateral, optical question
and issue. If anyone would like to comment on that, please do.
Governor Lindsey.
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think you have laid out a very
good strategy for the approach to our Humphrey-Hawkins report.
Based
on the conversation and particularly President Parry's question, I
would like to note that from an a priori view we may know something.
There are really three possibilities that we're considering, which
have to do with the money demand curve shifting because of loan
repayments or runoffs of time deposits or what have you. The first
possibility is that the shift in the demand curve is of a temporary
nature and it will shift back. That means we believe small time

6/30-7/1/92

-39-

deposits, for example, may come back in vogue in the future or that
bank margins somehow may [go] back down. If that's the case, then
velocity will also bounce back and we are going to need a symmetric
I think that gets to the heart
tolerance of M2 growth down the road.
The second possibility is that we have a
of Jerry Jordan's question.
permanent demand shift and we're going to see at some unknown point in
the future a new equilibrium emerge between the banking sector and
other financial intermediaries, with permanently higher bank margins.
If that's the case, then velocity will not bounce back but it will
stop growing and we'll establish a new velocity relationship but not
one where we have this continual 3 percent growth in velocity. And in
that case our M2 targets are going to have to be roughly what our
The third possibility is what I would call a
nominal GNP targets are.
that forevermore we're going to see loan
continual demand shift:
That would mean
repayments and runoffs of small time deposits.
velocity will always be shifting. We'll have, say, 3 percent velocity
In that case, we should permanently lower our
shifts every year.
Frankly, I find the continual demand shift model
money targets.
incredible.
If nothing else, there are only so many time deposits to
run off; there are only so many loans to be repaid. But I think [the
So, I think we're torn between
shift] will actually stop before that.
I
the temporary demand shift and the permanent demand shift models.
believe that informs our discussion and if anything, Mr. Chairman, it
reinforces the view that you have just expressed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Well, I agree quite strongly with where you come
out, Mr. Chairman. While we may approach it differently tactically,
we all agree that the idea of Fed credibility is very, very important,
particularly I would say at a time when, as you mentioned earlier,
But I think we
there are so many shifting sands in other areas.
reinforce that credibility when we don't know something by saying we
[That is] my
don't know it rather than by pretending that we do.
I think Larry has outlined
greatest fear when we go up [on the Hill].
three alternatives quite well. My own view is that the structural
shifts are still going on and I agree with him in that I don't expect
But I would be very concerned about making a
them to go on forever.
change that would be predicated on the notion that we have some idea,
with a measurable degree of precision, of where we are in this whole
The more difficult
process.
I just don't think we are at that point.
the timing. And
problem, as you indicated, is the pedagogical one:
in that context I think we just ought to say that we don't have a
precise answer regarding what is going on and we'll keep [Congress]
informed. It's an excellent strategy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm with you about 95 percent of
the way, which is a lower percentage than it usually is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'll take it any time!

MR. BLACK. But in the absence of some multi-year policy
strategy such as the "tunnel" strategy that Governor Lindsey and I so
bravely proposed back in December, which we all did not have the
wisdom to accept, I think we have to look upon these one-year targets
that we set now as sort of a mid-term benchmark. We don't know what

-40-

6/30-7/1/92

the heck is going to happen, as you correctly said, so I think it's
very wise to stick to the 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent [M2 target] for this
year. The main reason I would suggest that is not that I think we're
likely to be anywhere near the 6 percent, but that there is a
possibility we might be there. And to have to change [the target]
later on by raising it because we chose a range that was too low would
reverse what we've been doing over a long period of time.
There's a
beautiful story in Appendix A of the Bluebook showing how, since about
1980, we've been lowering these targets steadily over time, and I
think that conveys an important message. But if we were to choose the
lower range and then for some reason or other M2 or the other
aggregates were to strengthen and we had to raise the range, I think
that would muddle the thinking of the whole financial market and it
would be very bad.
But by the same token, as we choose our target
this time I think we ought to send an unambiguous message to the
markets that we have not lost sight of our long-term objective of good
economic growth with stable prices. And I would favor very strongly
adopting for 1993 a range of, say, 2 to 6 percent [or] one of the
recommended ranges--say, 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent.
Governor Angell and
I discussed that last night. A 2 to 6 percent range would be my
preference because of the uncertainty, but 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent
wouldn't bother me either unless we got to the point that it really
wasn't enough and we had to raise that. So, I would really prefer the
2 to 6 percent because I think that gives us enough room on the
downside to convince the market of what we really want to do and at
the same time enough to provide adequate financing for whatever
economic growth we can get.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.

President Melzer.

That sounded like 50 percent agreement to me,

Bob!
MR. BLACK.

It was higher than that!

MR. MELZER. Alan, I'm in agreement with what you recommend.
The only other comment I would make is that in principle I'd align
myself with what Jerry was suggesting and I think Bob was suggesting
in terms of what these targets represent. If, let's say, we were
experiencing some temporary demand shifts or whatever but we still
felt confident about longer-term relationships between money and
income, I would like to get to the point eventually where we set the
targets to be consistent with what we think is an environment of price
stability.
In other words, we should gradually work them down to some
level that we think is [unintelligible], explaining why we missed and
not get into the mode that Bob suggested of possibly moving these
targets up and down based on what could be short-term [developments].
That's a moot point in this context, I totally agree.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Implicit in my suggestion is that this
item remains on the table until we get it resolved.
MR. MELZER.
Oh, I understand that.
I'm just expressing my
view on that point, but I totally agree with where you are right now.
MR. BLACK. Just to reinforce that I was about 95 percent
with you, I think your suggestion that you explain this in your
Humphrey-Hawkins testimonies is absolutely vital.

-41-

6/30-7/1/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
mention]

Oh, indeed.

MR. BLACK. I strongly endorse that; I just forgot
it.
But I'm 60/40 if-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

He's

[to

So 50 and 60 adds up to 110!

1000 percent behind you!

MR. SYRON. You have a narrower confidence; you're willing to
support it with more precision than the precision we have in the Ms at
this point in time.
MR. BLACK. Well, like Governor Lindsey, I think there's a
I
limit to how far these things can go, but I don't know what it is.
think a lot of [the adjustment] probably is behind us because I don't
know anybody who has thought about it at all who has not shifted money
I cited my mother-in-law who is 85 and has gone long-term.
out of M2.
And the Chairman asked me if she was holding these for income.
I said
probably but she wasn't averse to taking a few capital gains if they
came. There has to be an end to this, but I don't know when it will
be. I think Don's group has done a very, very good job in addressing
all the issues; it's one of the finest things they've done, yet I'm
sure they feel somewhat dissatisfied with it because it's so complex.
If this target-setting gets any more complicated than it is today, it
is going to mitigate to some extent the disappointment I have in not
I don't
being able to participate in the next target-setting session.
think I could find one any more challenging than what we have today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I've agonized quite a bit over this issue of
uncertainty about the velocities and control in hitting targets versus
the information to the public at large--the need to announce the
I would not like to see targets
targets and how that is stated.
announced in such a way that we are lowering the ranges and the
headlines read "The Fed Tightens Policy" without [our action] being
I go
tied to some other things that would condition that perception.
back to what Bob Parry said yesterday afternoon in the first go-around
as he concluded his statement about the importance of making our
longer-run intentions clear. With the uncertainty or the discomfort
over what is going on in the legislative and executive branches of
government and the current political situation, it is not the right
message for this institution to say:
"Well, if you thought that was
bad enough, we've lost our compass as well and we also are not sure
about the future and the outlook."
The monetary aggregates, especially M2 with its long
historical record despite all our uncertainty about M2 as currently
put together, are still the best guide that we have for communicating
to people what the long-run outlook is.
And we have to do what we can
I was not a
to say this will still serve for the foreseeable future.
part of your deliberations not to lower the target range this year, so
I'm not in a position of either saying "I told you so" or having to
defend something now that was done without the considerable advantage
of hindsight.
I thought it was useful information to the public at
large that the target ranges were gradually lowered year-by-year, with
either the upper or lower bound or both being brought down.
Had that

6/30-7/1/92

-42-

sequence been continued this year you would have [established a range
of] 2 to 6 percent, which I think would have been very desirable, and
we would be looking at 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for next year and 1 to 5
percent for the year after that and would be serious about it.
And
that would help people in thinking about the long run.
We've been in
the situation very recently of being at the bottom end or even below
the bottom end of the range, and people are wondering if we really are
serious about the Ms.
I thought the action in April couched in terms
of M2 was a useful beginning toward saying we're really serious about
it in a symmetrical way; if we're below the bottom end of the target
range, we'll do something about it and try to get [money growth] up so
that people understand that the opposite is also true.
Therefore, if
we were at the top or above the top end of the range, we'd also be
serious about that, so people would know that we are committed to
moving toward a growth rate of money that is consistent with price
stability. So, I would like to see the range reset this year at 2 to
6 percent, where I think it should have been anyway. I'm in-between
To go all the way to 1-1/2 percent
alternative I and alternative II.
now and leave it there for 1993 would lose some information that I
But if we leave the bottom end of the range at
think is important.
2-1/2 percent this year and have 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent again next
year, then I think that we are bound to say "Here's what we're going
to do to make very certain that [M2 growth] is at least within the
range rather than at the bottom end," and couple that with
[appropriate] short-run actions.
Just to cover what I would really like to see right now:
[I'd favor] a very unusual event that should not necessarily be a
precedent for the future.
I'd announce the ranges well in advance of
the hearings--[the Humphrey-Hawkins hearings] being the customary way
to do it--coupled with a strong statement that we are serious about
being within the range and are willing to engage in reserve supplying
operations consistent with an expectation of lower interest rates
[associated] with the lower monetary targets for '93.
And especially
important to me would be that this be done in a way that the Committee
is viewed as being solidly behind both the short-run action and the
long-run action.
I'm very troubled by the perception of the press
that changes in the funds rate up or down say something about our
long-run commitment to growth versus inflation or the Phillips curve
[tradeoff], or that sort of thing. So, [I'd suggest] an unusual press
conference approach announcing the ranges and the interest rates
expected to be associated with them. And I'd not do that on the day
that the employment numbers come out so that we disassociate the
action and the announcement of what we want from a measure like
employment or unemployment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Jerry, suppose we are in a process now
of a major change in the role of intermediation in the financial
system as a consequence of the decline in the franchise value of the
intermediation process, significant increases in intermediation costs,
statutory issues, and a major structural change involving one of the
Suppose we in
large elements in the intermediation process--the S&Ls.
retrospect can look back on this period as one with a structural
discontinuity that doesn't change the long-term interface between
various monetary aggregates, inflation, growth, and the like.
Suppose
that our P* model requires a level adjustment but then proceeds and
It will turn out that we will be back to an
works as well as before.
appropriate process of where we should be and how we should be doing

6/30-7/1/92

-43-

that, but it will also turn out that this particular period will be a
period of structural change that will create a deceptive [impression]
with respect to how the aggregates are being employed either for
monetary policy purposes or as indicators of what is going on in the
financial structure of the system. And until we know that or until we
have a sense of that, we would be taking a risk in doing what you're
I say that as one who philosophically agrees fully with
suggesting.
I do think that we should be working
the position you've just stated.
our way down to a stable price environment and at that point then hold
the money supply within a relatively stable, modest range--whatever we
But having said that, it would be an act
may decide that should be.
of faith on my part to do what you're suggesting because it
presupposes we know the answer to something I'm afraid we don't.
I appreciate that uncertainty. Presuming
MR. JORDAN.
I think that
knowledge that we don't have is very troubling to me.
I agree that we're in some kind
what you have described is the case.
of transitional period to an environment that we will all easily
recognize 10 years from now, looking back upon the period as maybe an
early 1960s [type of] world in terms of inflation and interest rates
and various relationships.
It is also a risk to see things like total
bank reserves down for the month of June and M1 or M2 or [some other]
measure down. The whole array of [monetary measures] is contracting
I'm afraid
and we are not taking action to do something about it.
that if we back away from the aggregates generally, especially M2 in
the way it has guided this Committee in the past, that we will simply
be looking through the aggregates to real economic activity. And-I think we'll be
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not necessarily.
looking through the aggregates to the total financial system; what I
think we actually will do is to try to use the aggregates as a proxy
for a much broader view of a very complex financial system. What we
should appropriately do is to try to look through [the monetary
measures] into what in fact is going on in the financial system. If
indeed there are other factors that are suggesting that movements in
the aggregates in the most recent weeks are pointing to something, we
should begin to see it in certain areas of the system other than
nominal gross domestic product or any of the real variables. I don't
think any of us would wish to argue that if we see financial
constriction occurring in which the aggregates are merely indications
of other developments, that action wouldn't be an appropriate thing to
In fact we'll be
put on the table.
Obviously, I think it would be.
discussing in our next segment whether or not that is indeed the case.
MR. JORDAN. I've taken some comfort previously from the fact
that M2 was at the bottom of the range but Ml was off the top of the
charts, the monetary base was growing very rapidly, and bank reserves
were growing very rapidly. Given that, I concluded that probably the
truth was someplace in between; M2 was probably understating stimulus
Now, it's only one
and Ml and other [measures] were overstating it.
month of information, and I don't want to put too much [emphasis on]
that, but I am uncomfortable with the idea that [all the monetary
measures] seem to be contracting all at once.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's a most legitimate concern,
and I don't think any of us would--

-44-

6/30-7/1/92

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I don't see a lot of difference in
the approaches the two of you are suggesting except that I think Jerry
would favor reducing the range next year because of the signal effect.
Otherwise it seems to me you have said essentially the same things, as
I've understood you. That's the point I was trying to make.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think the difference basically is that
I would prefer not to make a firm statement about 1993 until we know
something beyond what we know at this particular moment. At the point
when we can again say that we know something about the way M2 or
whatever [measure] we're using at that time is responding, then we can
tie that to our long-term goals in a manner which emphasizes what the
very general policy of this Committee is.
MR. BLACK.
I would much prefer that if we had the option.
But if we should take a step toward [ease] either through adoption of
a directive that is asymmetrical toward ease or through dropping the
federal funds rate, I think we badly need something out there for the
future that says we have not abandoned our long-term quest for price
stability. And that's why I-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would say, frankly, that it's
essential that we do that in the Humphrey-Hawkins report, no matter
what we do at this table.
At this particular period in time to
reemphasize our commitment to price stability over the longer run as a
fundamental goal of the FOMC is fully appropriate independently of
what our discussions [today] or otherwise are with respect to the
issue of the ranges.
MR. BLACK.
I was sure you would feel that way.
I just feel
that some tangible movement in cutting the aggregate ranges would be
necessary and make that as believable as I would like it to be.
MR. JORDAN. That's why I was suggesting coupling them on
just this one occasion. While they are independent in some respects,
as I said, I wouldn't be happy to see a headline that says "Fed
Tightens Policy" if we lower the ranges; but I also wouldn't be happy
to see a headline saying "The Fed Caves In" if we cut the funds rate.
MR. BLACK.

That's my problem.

MR. JORDAN.
Putting the two together and announcing the
range and an expectation of lower rates in order to achieve these
[monetary growth objectives] is an important message about the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I very strongly support your
recommendation.
I think you put your finger on the issue correctly
when you indicated that were it not for Humphrey-Hawkins we probably
wouldn't even be having this discussion. As a matter of fact, I would
like to see us spend a little time thinking about how we can get out
of this Humphrey-Hawkins box entirely. But that's another issue and
it's particularly unrealistic [to address it] at this time.
Due to
all the uncertainties surrounding the aggregates generally and
particularly M2 at the moment, I think we'd be making a big mistake to
pay too much attention to them and in effect to chase them by lowering
the ranges either for '92 or '93.
This is not to say that we should

-45-

6/30-7/1/92

ignore the aggregates; they do contain information that we have to
look at, but certainly over a longer period of time. So, I think our
best strategy at the moment with the Congress is to communicate fully.
After all, that is what the Humphrey-Hawkins is all about--not so much
the setting of the ranges but delineating to the Congress what our
intentions are over the longer term both with respect to [economic]
So, I think we can explain the shortfall in M2
growth and prices.
adequately; and with so many uncertainties, to change the range for
And, of course, we have the opportunity
'93 now would be a mistake.
since this is only a tentative setting of the ranges anyway to make a
change in January or February. And by that time, hopefully we will
So,
have learned a little more about the behavior of the aggregates.
I think your recommendation is right on target.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
Mr. Chairman, Bob Black got into part of my
question but I want to follow it up.
I just have two questions and
then, depending on your answer, I'll respond.
Our commitment to price
level stability has in it, in a sense, the background that we thought
we were going to be lowering these M2 targets until we got down to an
M2 growth rate that was consistent with price stability.
I believe
many of us thought that it meant "never-never land"--that maybe at
some point in time M2 growth rates of 1 to 4 percent or somewhere in
that area would be consistent with price level stability if we didn't
have something going on with regard to the aggregates. After the
higher costs of intermediation have worked their way through--and I
think Larry Lindsey is right that these [adjustments] can't go on
forever, at least not in one direction--what in your mind would be an
appropriate M2 target consistent with price level stability in that
future out there?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I don't want to say that I know
While Larry Lindsey is
for sure, but let's define a couple of issues.
right that the adjustment can't go on forever, what he's really right
about is that it can't go on at the rate of change that we now are
It's really the second difference that he's raising from
looking at.
this perspective.
MR. ANGELL.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If we are using the franchise value of
intermediaries--in other words, if in effect technology is gradually
changing the fundamental purpose of commercial banking with its socalled credit knowledge capabilities so that securitization becomes
increasingly the means of financing--one can envisage a very small
intermediary sector.
In principle one can visualize zero; there's no
conceptual reason why a market economy as complex as ours cannot
function with direct finance, provided of course that there is
[unintelligible] part of securitization and other mechanisms for
So, I
transactions balances and the like or a narrow banking system.
want to say that over the long run it matters what we are measuring.
I can envisage the current definition of M2 actually being consistent
with a trend in which unit M2, that is the ratio of M2 divided by
potential real gross domestic product, falls relative to the level of
Now, I don't know
prices, meaning it's a sort of P* with a trend.
What I'm reasonably certain
what that is at this particular moment.
of is that to the extent there is a sign, if I may put it that way, it

-46-

6/30-7/1/92

is negative. That is another way of saying that income velocity is a
long-term constant; that's the same thing as saying that the price
level is proportional to unit money supply.
Now, I'm saying that is
the outside limit as far as I can judge of what is occurring and that
the only thing that may happen is basically that we're getting to a
long-term uptrend in velocity, which is the obverse of the decline of
the intermediation process.
I don't know what the number is; all I'm
saying essentially is that in the context of a constant long-term
velocity an appropriate guide to monetary policy may be somewhat less
than a 1 to 4 percent range.
MR. ANGELL.
The second question is:
If you believe as you
and Bob were indicating in your interchange that price level stability
needs to be a significant part of the Humphrey-Hawkins report--and you
know I agree with that--what alternate form of communication do you
propose [to convey] that that's what we are out to do and the manner
in which we want to do it?
What would substitute for Jerry Jordan's 2
to 6 percent range that some of us voted for last year and pulling
that down?
I'm open to another program.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say the only program that's
involved here is a short delay until we get the issue resolved because
I think at some point we have to revisit [the question of the ranges
for] 1993.
And I wouldn't necessarily wait until February if we've
come to a conclusion before then.
MR. ANGELL. Well, you see my question stems from a view that
there is something resembling a Wicksellian natural rate of interest
prevailing in the critical 5-year, 7-year intermediate interest rate
area, and we have tacked onto that Wicksellian natural rate an
uncertainty premium in regard to inflation because the world doesn't
know what we're doing. What I'm asking is:
What do we say?
How do
we explain our action?
What is the guidepost that causes the bond
markets around the world to understand the nature of our commitment?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony?
MR. ANGELL.

Are you talking about what we say in the

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say that we'd have to do it
verbally and do it in a manner which specifies that we're working on
this and that when we come to a conclusion we'll announce it.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I am so committed to such a proposal and I
have such questions about M2, which we're working on, that I'm
certainly willing to consider an alternative that has that kind of
commitment to explain to the world exactly what it is that guides us.
And it indicates in a sense the rigors of monetary policy. You know,
gold standards aren't marvelous deals; the only thing gold standards
do is that they ensure some kind of discipline that will remain there;
if you stay with that game, you don't have the luxury of doing what's
popular. What we have to do is to indicate some better system than
that, which would give the world the confidence we need so that we can
get economic growth restored.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If the judgment of this Committee is
right--to the extent I can infer from the various statements different

-47-

6/30-7/1/92

people have made--I would contemplate, [indeed I think] it's quite
conceivable, that we may end up in the latter part of 1993 and into
1994 with significant acceleration of economic activity in the context
If that
of a much lower inflation rate than we are looking at now.
were the scenario and if we were at that point in a moderate financial
posture as a central bank, I would say that the message would have
been very well delivered and that we would have created a very high
Now, the problem we have is the
degree of central bank credibility.
tremendous uncertainties about what is going on at this moment not
only with respect to the economy but with respect to the money supply.
It's very difficult to develop any firm footing because we have to be
careful not to put our foot down solidly when we don't know whether
If I
I think we have very little choice.
what is underneath is firm.
personally thought that at this stage we had in the pipeline a level
of inflationary liquidity in the system, I would say that we would be
Then
in a wholly different environment than what I think we're in.
But I
the issue you are raising would disturb me quite a great deal.
don't think that is the case, which means that I don't think that our
having difficulty with this issue is or should be more than a
technical problem now rather than what it could be, which would be
rather dangerous. As Jerry Jordan points out, if the view were that
all of a sudden the Federal Reserve has lost its footings, then I
think we'd be in real difficulty.
MR. ANGELL. Frankly, Mr. Chairman, I think that a statement
in the Humphrey-Hawkins from you that indicates our commitment to this
program and our expectations of some success--almost a Bundesbank-like
commitment to price level stability--without any monetary aggregates
in it, would work. But that's a pretty tough step for us to take.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think what we would do is to
repeat basically what we have [said] before because we're testifying
before Steve Neal.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes, he's very friendly.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, and what we are subscribing to is
basically Steve Neal's proposition. We've already done that, and it
is not--nor should it be perceived as--a shift in policy for this
institution.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I can go with your recommendation with
this interchange as background, and I thank you.
Your proposal for '93
MR. MELZER. Alan, just to clarify:
It's not
would be just to stick with what we had in '92 and explain?
to say that we have nothing for '93.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I'm basically saying that what we
are doing is putting in a marker temporarily.
MR. MELZER.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

And that will be what we had in

'92?

That is correct.

If we do that, I think a lot of the
MR. MELZER. Okay.
public is not going to look at the nuances, though some people will.
But they would really notice if there were nothing there.

6/30-7/1/92

-48-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
as a holding position.
MR. MELZER.

Yes,

I think we have to put something in

I agree.

MR. BLACK. You said you didn't want to put your foot down
firmly, Mr. Chairman; I think 2 to 6 percent would not be putting your
foot down firmly like 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent would be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. A 2 to 6 percent range presupposes that
we know something in order to move from one range to the other, and I
feel uncomfortable about that.
MR. BLACK. I understand. You're in a very defensible
position; you're a very persuasive person; you have higher credibility
than anybody in the country.
But if we don't lower that range, I
think people are not going to believe everything you say.
That is
what I'm afraid of.
MR. ANGELL. In a sense that's the problem we had a year ago.
When we talked about the range for '92 we said:
"Well, let's just put
the tentative marker down and leave it alone."
Then when we got to
February we said:
"Well, we really don't want to change our tentative
marker."
So our tentative marker last year got to be a little more
solid than some of us had hoped.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But then we believed that when we looked
at M2 we were looking at something that-MR. ANGELL. Well, I didn't think we were and I didn't think
Don thought we were. I thought M2 was a problem a year ago.
Opportunity costs and M2 velocity were running off the charts a year
ago, so we knew we had a problem.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I knew we had a problem; it's not like
President Parry.
the problem we have now, I tell you!
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I certainly would support your
recommendation for 1992, particularly with the explanation of the
uncertainties.
I really do think there is a far better alternative
for 1993.
It seems to me that if we were to reduce the range by 1/2
percentage point, there are some things we could say that would make a
great deal of sense. First of all, we could indicate that the
uncertainties are likely to persist, and I'm sure we feel that way.
The staff projections would be more consistent with that range than
the current range. And most importantly, it would be consistent with
our view that over the long term we have this objective of price
stability. I don't see anything to lose.
That doesn't mean that
What it
we're changing it and the uncertainties have disappeared.
means is that we believe that at some point in the reasonable future
those uncertainties are likely to disappear.
But there is no reason
[not] to take small steps in that direction. As a matter of fact, I
think there will be a large group in financial markets and other
places who would misinterpret the meaning of our staying with the
existing targets for two years. And I don't see what we give up at
all by just reducing the range 1/2 percentage point.
It's consistent
with the long term; it's consistent with the projections; and it's

6/30-7/1/92

-49-

consistent with the idea that the uncertainties are temporary.
no problem.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I see

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I would support your
First of
suggestion. I have just a couple of comments to tack on.
all, in terms of this discussion about credibility and price stability
In trying
and so on, I'm a believer in what we do, not what we say.
to get a point of view across to the Congress and the public, it's
obviously important, as a number of people suggested, that we reaffirm
that.
But it's also not a bad idea to look at the record. And the
record of the past five or six years, including 1992, in terms of
money growth is pretty darn good. Not only is it darn good in an
arithmetic sense [unintelligible] in terms of achieving price
stability, but the fact of the matter is that this Committee has shown
a great deal of stick-to-it-ness over the past three years in a
context in which the performance of the economy by most standards has
been lousy. I think we have a darn good story to tell.
So, I would
tell both sides of the story:
I would put some real emphasis not just
on saying what we're thinking about for the future but what we have
done.
I think it's a very good story.
Now, the other comments I want to make are that I agree very
much with this rather cute little idea of yours of keeping the
Congress informed, but I wouldn't go too far in that direction or
they'll have you up there every Thursday afternoon after the money
So, I think we have to hang loose
supply statistics are released!
there a little.
The last point I want to make, and I think it's more
important, is that clearly part of what we're seeing here is this at
least temporarily changed [financial] intermediation process. And I
think it's appropriate to put emphasis and perhaps a good deal of
That is partly
emphasis on that. But there's more to it than that.
the reason I made the comment yesterday, and I've made it before, that
if it were just M, whatever M you want, that looked funny, that
argument would be quite credible.
But it's not just M whatever; it's
the whole shooting match that looks funny. Therefore, at the very
least, I think in your explanation you have to try not to get too tied
to this intermediation issue itself. The other thing that obviously
can be brought to bear is the debt restructuring and all that. That's
another way of saying that the questions that are running around in my
mind go well beyond just the disintermediation phenomenon and the role
of the intermediaries, short term and long term.
I'm cautious about
betting the ranch on that issue.
The only other point I'd make in
concluding, just to complicate matters further, is that if I wanted
to, I could make a pretty good argument that price stability could
turn out to be quite compatible with higher rates of growth of the
money supply rather than lower.
That again is just another way of
saying that we're in a heck of a box in terms of how definitive we
could be about much of anything.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. I just want to ask a question of Bill McDonough.
I'm taking the opportunity [now], but the question is one that was
more relevant earlier.
I think we're talking about tactics here.
I

6/30-7/1/92

have a fair amount of sympathy for the message [and] the credibility
we want to [earn].
But the concern I have and the reason I strongly
support staying with the existing ranges is that I simply don't think
we know enough.
I'm deeply concerned that to lower the range by 1/2
percentage point--the question I want to ask Bill McDonough is related
to this--would say that we think we know something with some degree of
precision.
We have three audiences:
the financial markets, the
public, and the Congress.
The question I have for Bill is whether in
this environment, looking particularly at the financial markets, he
agrees with my perception that the markets think the Ms are rather
confused at this point and whether they would put a lot of weight on
the credibility side if we lowered the [bottom of the] range from
2-1/2 to 2 percent.
MR. MCDONOUGH.
If the Chairman makes a very strong statement
without putting himself in too much of a box--in that regard I would
support President Corrigan--that there is a commitment on the part of
the FOMC to price stability, I think that is what is important.
And
it can be done in a way in which holding the M2 [range] as the
Chairman suggests is going to be fully acceptable to the market.
I
think the market would say this:
"If you say that you really are
uncertain about what is going on in the monetary aggregates and
therefore are going to leave them alone, that's fully understandable.
If you say you don't know what is going on in the monetary aggregates
and are studying it and are going to come up with an answer but in the
meantime you are going to change the range, the story doesn't hold
together."
I think the market is always very confused about a story
that doesn't hold together and is very accepting of a spokesman with
[the Chairman's] degree of credibility saying:
"We're not sure; we're
studying it; and we're going to come up with an answer as soon as we
have one."
That's a very comprehensible, understandable, believable
story.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I strongly support your recommendation. At this
juncture--and this has been said a couple of times already--our first
obligation is to tell the Congress what we know and what we don't know
about M2.
I think we know a good deal more than we knew at the last
meeting but we certainly have not resolved all the uncertainties. In
any event, we should share that with the Congress; and putting a great
deal of emphasis on the ranges in this context just doesn't make a lot
of sense to me.
So, leaving the ranges where they are is fine with
me.
From an institutional point of view or a credibility point of
view, being direct with the Congress is the way to go in an
environment where it is widely recognized that there are some changing
relationships and some mystery with regard to the aggregates and maybe
other credit and financial variables as well.
That will enhance
credibility rather than undercut it.
We're not going to fool anybody
by pretending that we have some insights that we don't have, at least
at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. I would support your approach, although I have a
lot of sympathy for Jerry Jordan's comments. The difficulty, as
others here have said, is that we are in transition; we are uncertain.
In that position, changing targets--whichever way--leaves open so many

6/30-7/1/92

-51-

questions that I think it will only confuse the participants, and that
So, I'd go along with your recommendation. I'd carefully
is unwise.
explain it and, as Jerry Corrigan said, make a little [comment] on our
I think
record and our commitment to price stability in that context.
that will be accepted better than our suggesting that we know
something when we don't.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

Well, Mr. Chairman I strongly support your
MR. KELLEY.
suggestion. And for the reasons that have just been articulated by
many, I don't think there's a thing in the world wrong with
[acknowledging] uncertainty and [exercising] great caution in the face
of basically changing conditions and a situation in which we don't
I don't think any
know where those conditions are going to resettle.
It would be a mistake
apology or any excuse whatsoever is necessary.
if we were to try to bluff our way through and say that we know more
than we know or alternatively, at the other end of the spectrum, if we
"Never mind, we are still
were to stick our head in the sand and say:
going to fly on the same old instruments."
I don't think either of
The key to credibility and integrity
those courses would be credible.
here is to be candid about this situation. We are working hard to
reformulate the guidelines to policy [to foster] new understanding
when that's possible to do.
I'm not sure when it will be possible to
do, which is the only other point I would like to make.
I think we
have to discipline ourselves and probably educate the Congress and the
public to the fact that it may take some time before it's possible to
do that again. It may be a while before conditions are sufficiently
stable for us to have some confidence that we understand where we are
and for things to have settled down so we are able to reformulate our
basic guiding stars.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I would support your proposal.
I do think
It seems
there's a case for cutting [the range] a half point in 1993.
to me that it's simply time to do so in the normal rhythm of things.
It was not unusual to skip last year. In the summer of '88 the
Committee cut the ranges for the following year, skipped '89, cut in
The difficulty is that it's '92 now and in the
'90, and skipped '91.
normal pattern it would be time to move. It would put the market on
notice, independent of federal funds rate moves and other policy
moves.
The difficulty I see--and the reason I would agree with your
proposal--is that it's simply difficult to send a clear signal in the
current environment with the context of a distorted M2; it's difficult
to separate the policy target from the questions of distortions of M2.
What we lose is that we muddle the signal.
I think there's no way to
avoid the suspicion that we're moving the target down in part because
M2 is weak. And I think we would have a better signal of long-term
It's
policy and our targets after this is better understood.
unfortunate because we are moving up to a period where we have the
capacity for reassessment of that inflation premium that Governor
Angell talked about.
And I am concerned when I look at what the
They expect rates to go
market expects later this year and next year:
By setting the fed funds rates we'll get precious little market
up.
Money hasn't been a reliable signal.
information on when to do that.
So, I am a bit concerned that we'll find ourselves following the
market up, lagging, and chasing credibility. And one way to try to

6/30-7/1/92

-52-

get ahead of it is to put the market on notice and send the signal
early. I think we'll have a much clearer picture in the months ahead;
and maybe we will not have to wait until February because I tend to
think that much of this may be transitory.
We'll see how the time
deposit refugees feel if the stock market gets a little cool here!
I
do expect the yield curve to flatten in at least two ways.
And I
It is true that we
think the de-leveraging is running its course.
have these higher costs of intermediation which have already given the
So, they seem not
banks all-time record profits in the first quarter.
to be suffering too much. Therefore, I think there is a case for
cutting the ranges at this time. But the difficulty is that we would
lose the signal in this environment, so I would support your proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I completely agree with your
proposal and support it for the reasons that you stated. The only
thing I would add is that by lowering the ranges it's just possible
that we might send some signal to the people who are viewing our
outlook and expectations for the economy in terms of the [monetary]
I just don't think that's the signal we want to send.
growth rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman, but
I just have a nervous reaction as to how much we tell the world that
we don't know. This is a jittery kind of situation. We have an
unusual political situation and an uncertain trend to the economic
And this
recovery that most of us, I think, believe is genuine.
institution is considered one of the anchors, one of the stable
If we are
factors in this whole political and economic environment.
too forthcoming about how little we know about M2, which is the
[measure] on which we have hung all of our policy rationale for the
past several years, frankly I think that could be a very destabilizing
So, I'd just caution that we should
element in the whole environment.
be very careful as to how much we say about how little we know.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

Clearly, we're in this terrible gray area that
MS. PHILLIPS.
Governor Kelley talked about yesterday. I'm having a bit of a hard
time separating the discussion on the longer-range goals and the
short-term action. To try to comment on the goals outside of some
It
discussion about the short-term action I find a little difficult.
seems to me that if they were taken in conjunction, we'd have an
A message about the strength of the
opportunity to give two messages:
economy and at the same time a signal with respect to our seriousness
about inflation. As a citizen I also have some difficulty setting
goals that we have no chance of meeting and that we're not intending
In a managerial sense I've generally thought of goal-setting
to meet.
as something that makes a statement as to where one wants to go.
I
don't think goals are always set in an environment where one has full
knowledge of all of the variables that make up what goes into those
goals.
So, I'd rather see a bit of a conjunction in the message that
on the one hand we're going to ease to try to deal with the economy
but at the same time we are making a statement about inflation with
respect to our longer-run objectives.

-53-

6/30-7/1/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation
primarily because I don't have a better idea. But I share Governor
LaWare's sentiment that it's rather tricky trying to enhance our
credibility by admitting that we don't know what is going on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

I
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, let me ask a question.
probably misunderstood what you said the first time in light of your
If in
later comments, particularly your answer to Governor Angell.
fact we go up [to Congress] and say that we are uncertain about where
If
things are temporarily, that's one thing. The question I have is:
we think, as you suggested, that a continual demand shift may be going
on, then aren't we really throwing monetary aggregates out the window
on a permanent basis?
I don't think so because the type of
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
shift that I was discussing is a long-term shift, in which what we're
dealing with is a relatively small "add factor" not a short-term or
even a major [unintelligible] break.
MR. LINDSEY. So, you would expect within the foreseeable
future that we would be back to some kind of stable money/income
relationship?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

I would certainly think so.

Is it your expectation that that will be by

'93

perhaps?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'm going to comment when
next agenda topic, the short-term [decision], on what I
on in the economy, which is not unrelated to that. Let
answer that question in that context because I need [to
background to give you my point of view.
MR.
is:
Are you
you say that
Friedman and

we get to the
think is going
me try to
cite] some

LINDSEY. My third question about what you were saying
In other words, if
going up there with no anchor at all?
temporarily we're not looking at M2, I think Milton
others have--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LINDSEY.

No,

Oh, good.

I'm not saying that.
Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We are saying that we are looking at it.
In
We're saying nothing more than we have basically said [before].
To say it is
other words, we are not saying it is meaningless.
meaningless is a statement of knowledge. What we're saying is that
something that had relationships has gone off the track. That
basically stipulates that for this particular time it has no meaning;
Indeed, it may be
it is a state of knowledge we don't have.
reflecting something quite significant, but we don't know that.
Implicit in your statement is that you would
MR. PARRY.
expect that uncertainty to continue through 1993?

-54-

6/30-7/1/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I don't know. I'm saying I expect
that the uncertainty will continue enough that we will not get through
the next Humphrey-Hawkins hearings with any real insight into what is
going on.
It may well be that by September or October we'll have a
much better sense of what is going on and a much better feel of what
the relationships are.
I might add that under those conditions I
would think we would then take a firm shot at 1993.
I myself would
not be disinclined, under those conditions, to go lower.
MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I think confusion demonstrates
why you're such a wonderful person to represent the Fed.

ahead!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]

I don't know if I like that but go

MR. LINDSEY. Well, I mean you managed to convince us all.
must admit I'm puzzled but-MR. ANGELL.
way that I vote?

I

In other words you find it hard to vote the same

MR. LINDSEY. In view of the fact that you are on the other
side of the table I'm not surprised.
I look forward to seeing your
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony, Mr. Chairman, in a tactical sense.
[Laughter]
But I appreciate your answer to the question and that
we're not abandoning M2.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I have no intention of doing that
because I, frankly, think it would be a mistake.
MR. LINDSEY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It's the question of interpreting what
we're looking at that's crucial.
President Jordan.
MR. JORDAN. I have both a question about how this would be
explained and also a recommendation. But before I get to either I
have a couple of comments that may sound like digressions but to me at
least they have a point. First, I'm in somewhat of an uncomfortable
position having written in 1982 very positively and glowingly about
the good relationship between Ml and nominal GNP and the stability of
M1 velocity over the prior 20 odd years just at about the time it was
breaking down.
So, I am hesitant about riding a horse that is in the
process of change.
Some 20 to 25 odd years ago or more, there was a
lot of discussion in this Committee, in System committees on the
directive, and in academic circles about technological change and
innovation--what was going on in the financial system--suggesting that
the relationship between the narrow aggregate, Ml. and economic
activity would break down because of velocity growing extremely
rapidly due to things like sweep accounts, point-of-sale transactions,
automatic transfers, credit card utilization, and so on.
The idea was
that the demand for some narrow measures of transactions liabilities,
maybe even currency, would decline and so velocity would [grow].
Well, we had exactly the opposite in spite of all that wisdom that
went into what would be wrong with Ml.
In the late 1970s there was a great deal of work done, some
by the Board's staff, some by staff of the Reserve Banks and by

6/30-7/1/92

-55-

economists of commercial banks--the ABA advisory committee was very
active in it--assisting in the effort to try to improve control of the
That wound up in the 1980 omnibus
narrow monetary aggregates.
legislation. The way we got to the single uniform reserve ratio on
We
all transactions liabilities was that we wanted to crown M1.
wanted to reduce the variability of the multiplier so that when
balances shifted from Reserve City banks to country banks, members,
nonmembers, savings and loans and on and on, we stopped getting all
We entered into this legislation with Bob
the noise we were getting.
That may have helped in the very
Weintraub's help [unintelligible].
short-run sense because nothing happened with Ml; [that] would do us
no good at all in terms of M2.
My question first before the
If the targets were not changed for '92 and '93,
recommendation is:
would that be accompanied--in addition to a statement that we're
studying this and we're comfortable being below the target range
pending results of studies and we're not going to do anything--by a
fairly clear indication that we're not going to lower the range and we
are going to [take] actions intended to bring the growth back within
that range?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd be more inclined to imply--or even
to state if necessary--that if the money supply were on track or we
understood it, it would be the inclination of this Committee to lower
the ranges. In other words, I'd make a statement that it's the
philosophy of this Committee to move the ranges down, but in this
context, prior to an understanding as to what the appropriate
structure is, no action is being taken. My own inclination is to
suggest that the view of the Committee--if we decide to go the way I
was suggesting and I was just raising it as a suggestion--is that we
would reiterate the long-term goals that we have previously stated and
idicate that we do not believe that [the current] range captures the
lowest level that we ultimately wish to achieve and that there is a
further step to be taken. Don, am I correct that it was the last
hearing--or was it a year ago?--when we originally moved to this level
for the ranges and we stipulated that this was a way station to a
lower level?
I think reiterating that as our general purpose for our
long-term strategy can be done without getting involved in actually
saying that we would move the [ranges] down. That would imply that
when the numbers have gotten back on track and we understand them,
that the notion would reassert itself in the then context of
relationships that we figure are stable.
MR. JORDAN. Given that response, I guess I come out where
Bob Parry suggested in that he doesn't see what the cost is of-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The cost is basically what has been
There is a danger here that we
raised by Governor Mullins and others:
could be moving the ranges not as a [matter of] policy but as a
pragmatic [adjustment] merely because we are more or less getting them
It's a very difficult thing to fight.
down to where the numbers are.
It looks like an opportunistic as distinct from a principled action.
MR. JORDAN. My recommendation then is that we indicate in
addition to the point that we are very seriously studying these
relationships that we also are going to do more than just study this
and we're going to be making recommendations in order to enhance both
their control and maybe their relationship with economic activity. My
preferred recommendation for some time on that idea is to move to a

-56-

6/30-7/1/92

system, which would require legislation, of a single very low reserve
ratio applied to all non capital liabilities. On M2, we don't want a
single reserve ratio as we currently have only on transactions
liabilities and not on nontransaction liabilities.
We have this
oddity of unbound banks and surplus vault cash and on and on which
confuses the issue even as to what total reserves are in the usual way
of thinking.
My guess is that [the single reserve ratio] would be
well under 5 percent.
It would both correct the competitive inequity
problems in the banking industry today caused by the way FDIC
insurance is assessed in combination with Reg D and the way we impose
reserve requirements whether they're domestic oriented or funded
[unintelligible] pay the higher tax or franchise fee than does a
wholesale bank or money center bank.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Jerry, I think there's considerable
sympathy around this table for that view. Remember that the original
position regarding reserves on transactions balances largely reflected
a view as to how this Committee would function operationally when the
legislation was passed. Now that is no longer the case.
If people
are going to focus on M2, we would clearly want to look at the
question of why we have reserves on transactions balances only. That
is a very legitimate question.
We have to look at the problem we may
have with it, which is that if we do that something else will pop.
It's not something that we can automatically get involved in because
were we to do that, as we study it--which I'm sure is in fact your
purpose--we probably would get a far greater ability to stabilize M2
growth but at the cost of significantly more volatile interest rates,
at least in the short run. So, an interesting set of questions is
involved, but it's a quite legitimate issue to be raised because I
think there is a fundamental inconsistency in our approach to have
targets for aggregates which we effectively can't control.
I'm not
sure we can control M2.
MR. ANGELL.

That's the big point.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.
the proposal is to set
we could revisit this,
the ranges then rather

Governor Mullins.

A point of clarification:
As I understand it,
tentative preliminary ranges for '93 and that
say, in October or November and actually change
than wait until February.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, in fact that's precisely--

MR. MULLINS. Why don't we put it on the agenda as we get
more information and this will give us another opportunity to say
something instead of saying that we have-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What are you getting at?

MR. MULLINS. Well, on the FOMC meetings as we go forward
when it comes time to consider this, let's just put it [on the
agenda].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

Do it formally?

Yes, do it formally.

-57-

6/30-7/1/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, I think that's--

MR. MULLINS. Then we're communicating not just that we have
decided to postpone until February consideration of-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I have not intended to imply that we
That's the reason I said that we'd be sending up interim
would.
reports from the Committee.
MR. MULLINS.

It might be useful to do it in October or

November.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

Well, supposing we--

If we're not ready, it would not be useful!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say in the Humphrey-Hawkins
testimony that it's our expectation that this issue would be revisited
as soon as feasible, hopefully by the fall or whenever we're ready.
MR. MULLINS. Yes, I wouldn't expect you to commit in the
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony but just for our own planning.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, for our own planning this is on the
agenda until we resolve it; it's on every six weeks with a report from
Don because I don't think that we can put this aside until the
question has been addressed. President McTeer.
I believe
MR. MCTEER. Just an observation, Mr. Chairman:
it's true that over past periods when we've observed stable velocity
of various Ms, it has been stable because after the fact during the
period of changing circumstances the definitions of the Ms have been
So,
changed to take account of changes in composition and so forth.
they are sort of stable retroactively. With that background, I
believe we're overstating our ignorance because I think we do know a
Maybe we should be focusing
lot about what has been happening to M2.
For example, if we
more on that and perhaps less on the ranges.
adjust M2 over the past few months to what has been happening to stock
and bond funds and perhaps RTC activity, I believe that we can make
the case that M2, properly defined to take that into account, has been
pretty much in the middle of our target ranges.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but then unfortunately the trouble
is that if we carry that definition consistently back, it ceases to
have the earlier robust relationship with nominal gross national
product.
I'm not sure that the changing definitions have created that
much of an alteration in history. My recollection is that even though
the definition of M2 has changed materially over time, it has always
been stable back to the turn of century.
MR. MCTEER. I think it's the case with M2 and Ml,
that it's much more stable after the revisions backward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

I will not deny that.

I think we would have--

though,

-58-

6/30-7/1/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason you can assume that is that
we would not have published if it were less stable!
MR. MCTEER.
In any case, I would hate for us to overstate
our ignorance and have that be interpreted as our not having a clue as
to what is going on.
I think we know pretty much what is going on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What we will do essentially is to
indicate very much what the staff study suggests, which is a very
clever insight into a number of issues, and say what pieces of
information remain to be understood prior to our coming out with an
answer.
I think that's actually what we're doing. Any other
comments?
I'd like to have separate votes on this since there may be
differences. I would like to propose alternative I with the
stipulation that for 1992 [we will retain the current ranges].
You
have the language that goes with it.
Don, would you give us your
recommendation on the language here?
MR. KOHN.
Just on 1992, assuming the Committee votes to
retain the 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent range, the staff had put in a
sentence, shown at the bottom of page 21 and the top of page 22 of the
Bluebook, that the Committee might want to consider if it wanted to
say that velocity increases might persist and that it recognized that
[money] growth could be low. As I read this in the full light of the
FOMC meeting, my recommendation is that, given the uncertainty, I
wouldn't use the second half of this sentence saying that M2 and M3
could come in around the lower end of the ranges; we just really don't
know.
So, I think there are really two alternatives. One is to say:
"In evaluating the aggregates, the Committee anticipated that
developments contributing to unusual velocity increases could persist
in the second half of the year" or something like that so at least you
convey some sense that something unusual is going on. While you were
talking I was writing something else similar to that:
"In evaluating
the growth of the aggregates relative to the ranges, the Committee
recognized the unusual behavior of velocity apparently in train this
year" or something along those lines.
So, I would recommend against
the second half of the suggested sentence.
But the Committee might
want to say something like the first half of the sentence in the
directive. Obviously, this will be said in the Humphrey-Hawkins
report, so it's not as if we wouldn't be communicating with the
public.
But you could say something in the directive about
anticipating unusual velocity behavior this year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Humphrey-Hawkins report will be
published before this is published.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Sure.

So, this is

It's just a question of completeness of the

record.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

really a moot question?

Yes.

It's not important.

-59-

6/30-7/1/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The first [part of the]
probably makes sense and I'd leave it at that.
MR. ANGELL.

sentence I think

The first half?

Okay, so it
MR. KOHN. Just the first half of the sentence.
would say:
"The Committee anticipated that developments contributing
to unusual velocity increases could persist in the second half of the
year."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Period.

MR. BERNARD. This will be a vote on the 1992 ranges. The
first sentence on the general objectives would stay the same and then
"In furtherance of these objectives, the Committee
continuing:
reaffirmed at this meeting the ranges it had established in February
for growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent,
respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 to the fourth
quarter of 1992.
The Committee anticipated that developments
contributing to unusual velocity increases could persist in the second
And then to pick up on nonfinancial debt, about
half of the year."
"The monitoring range for growth of total
the middle of page 22:
domestic nonfinancial debt also was maintained at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2
percent for the year."
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Hoenig
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Syron
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Okay.

Congratulations, Mr. Chairman

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Wait a minute.

MR. BERNARD. And then for 1993 beginning about two-thirds or
so the way down on page 22: "For 1993, the Committee agreed on
tentative ranges for monetary growth, measured from the fourth quarter
of 1992 to the fourth quarter of 1993, of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent for
The Committee provisionally set the
M2 and 1 to 5 percent for M3.
associated monitoring range for growth of domestic nonfinancial debt
at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. The behavior of the monetary aggregates
will continue to be evaluated in the light of progress toward price
level stability, movements in their velocities, and developments in
the economy and financial markets."
MR. SYRON. May I ask a question just on the language?
I'm
sympathetic to the suggestion, but the concern about velocity also
applies to what we're talking about for the '93 ranges.
So, I'm

6/30-7/1/92

-60-

wondering if it would be better just to say that unusual velocity
could persist, period, rather than to say it could persist in the
second half of the year.
If it was thought that that sentence would
apply also to the '93 targets, that might be better because otherwise
we don't have something that explicitly says that.
MR. KOHN. We do.
The last sentence says:
"The behavior of
the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light of
progress toward price level stability, movements in their velocities,
and developments in the economy and financial markets."
MR. SYRON.
I saw that, but the earlier sentence that refers
to '92 is a little more explicit.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, the trouble is it creates the type
of problem that Governor LaWare is concerned about.
It makes too much
of a "know-nothing" [unintelligible].
MR. SYRON.
I understand that argument and I don't want to
say that we don't know anything; but I think there is a difference in
being able to say that the world has evolved and that our body of
knowledge and ability to interpret--our internal computer, so to
speak--hasn't diminished in terms of our effectiveness.
But it's this
external environment; it may be a subtle point and it may not be
possible [to convey it].
I happen to think that's what the situation
is, that our internal capacity to evaluate these things probably is
greater because of the experience than it has been in the past but
that the external environment is more difficult.
MR. KOHN. The sentence refers to velocity "increases," so I
don't know whether the Committee wants to make that statement about
next year particularly [unintelligible] ranges.
I think it recognizes
the fact that growth is coming in at under 2 percent, Q4 to June.
MR. SYRON.
It was a suggestion and I withdraw it.
can't withdraw a question!
[Laughter]

But I

MR. ANGELL.
Don, is there any alternative language to "The
Committee agreed on tentative ranges"?
It seems to me that what we're
saying here is something a little different than "agreed" on tentative
ranges.
I think what we've agreed to do is quite different; we are
really saying that we are deferring a decision to change the range.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can we say "The Committee tentatively
placed" or something like that?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes, any change in the wording would be helpful.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think you're right that the word
"agreed" is not the right word.

this.

MR. LAWARE.

"Tentatively established"?

MR. ANGELL.

"Established" is tough.

MR. PRELL.
The statute in force requires language close to
I think it requires you to "establish"--

-61-

6/30-7/1/92

MR. KOHN.

"Plans and objectives."

MR. PRELL. Yes, "plans and objectives."
tried not to, though that was more extreme--

And one time we

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, this will be a minor issue because
it will be published after the Humphrey-Hawkins report and we'll
handle that in that respect.
MR. LAWARE.

Why not just say the Committee "set" tentative

ranges?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes, "set" is better.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

That's a good idea.

Well,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's much better.
"plucked" might be even better!
I think "set" solves the problem.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. BERNARD.

Right.

Thank you.
Change "set" to "established" in the other

sentence?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay, sure.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Hoenig
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Syron
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

Okay, let's now break for coffee.
[Coffee break]

MR. KOHN. A number of members yesterday gave the reasons
I'd already written down for why the Committee might want to choose
one of the other courses for the intermeeting period and I won't
repeat them. I do have a few background points, though, to bring to
the attention of the Committee as you make your decision on short-run
policy. First, I can bring you up to date on the monetary aggregates;
we do have some new information this morning and it suggests a further
weakening in money growth and credit.
The revisions are exclusively
in the Ml category.
[Statement--see Appendix.]

6/30-7/1/92

-62-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Questions for Mr. Kohn?

Don, M1 growth from Q4 to June would be what?

MR. KOHN. Well, Governor Angell, I don't have that answer
for the new Ml, incorporating the latest revisions.
I guess I'd
subtract about 1/4 or 1/3 of a percentage point; growth from Q4 to
June before was 12-1/4 percent so my guess would be 12 percent or a
little under that.
MR. ANGELL.
double-digits then?
MR. KOHN.
MR. ANGELL.

So it's approximately 12 percent--well within

Yes.
And the 3-month growth rate of Ml?

MR. KOHN. Well, it was 6 percent and now it would be 5
percent approximately.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. SYRON.

Thank you.
Don, what is your early look at next week?

MR. KOHN. For the week to be published Ml would be about
flat and M2 and M3 would decline by about $3-1/2 billion and $9
billion respectively. I hasten to add that these are very preliminary
data subject to substantial revisions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Don, do you think the prime rate would respond
to a 1/4 point cut in the fed funds rate?
MR. KOHN. I think it's highly likely.
The banks didn't
respond last time; I think another cut would put pressure on them.
suppose they might try to resist, especially if there weren't a
discount rate cut at the same time.
It would be a nice test of
whether there is any aggressiveness out there in seeking loans.
MR. MCTEER.
employment numbers?
MR. KOHN.
MR. PARRY.
MR. KOHN.
MR. BLACK.

I

Do you have an educated guess about June
No.
Do you have a guess?
Mike has a guess.
Uneducated?

MR. PRELL. Our guess was 80,000.
Just to bring you up to
date, for those who don't have telerate screens today, the National
Association of Purchasing Managers came out with a report this
morning. The overall index was down [from] 56 and a fraction to 52
and a fraction. Construction put-in-place data for May came out; they
were a little hard to read because they involved revised seasonal
factors, but a quick look suggests that the numbers going from the

-63-

6/30-7/1/92

first to the second quarter were considerably stronger than we had
anticipated, particularly in the state and local sector. So,
offsetting some of the disappointment there-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
than expected!

We finally got a number that's higher

MR. PRELL. This state and local number is phenomenal; it's
running very strong.
MR. BLACK.

Was the private nonresidential unchanged?

MR. PRELL. Well, that's what is a little hard to read.
does not appear to be a drastic change from our expectation.
MR. ANGELL.

It

Does that modify your real GDP for the second

quarter?
MR. PRELL.
percent area.

Well, I think it helps it to stay in the 2

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions for Don?

MR. STERN. At the last meeting were we looking for 2-1/2
percent M2 growth for the second quarter or something like that?
MR. KOHN. We were looking particularly for about 1-1/2
percent in May and 3-1/2 percent in June, which we didn't get.
MR. STERN. Did you run a simulation or anything with the
experimental model for the second quarter?
MR. KOHN. Not for the second quarter, or at least if we did,
I
Dave Lindsey, are you aware of anything?
I'm not aware of it.
didn't ask anyone for it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Further questions?

Jerry.

MR. JORDAN. With the advantage of whatever hindsight there
is in the last few months, if you felt very strongly about 1-1/2
percent for growth of an aggregate in the second quarter--and it was
talked about a couple of months back--would an experimental model have
suggested that if there had been a sufficient cutting of the funds
rate it would have produced that kind of growth? And would we know
about which components of M3 are going down [unintelligible]?
MR. KOHN. I wouldn't know exactly what the ceteris paribus
That is, the interest
is there, but I think probably not.
elasticities in those models, while still of the appropriate sign,
assume that long rates react a little with short rates since there's a
[If] long rates go the wrong way
lot of yield curve [unintelligible].
or don't move at all, then the interest elasticities go essentially to
zero or even turn around. But assuming long rates came out as they
did over the second quarter, it would have taken a very large
reduction in short-term interest rates--I don't know the number--to
have gotten M2 growth into the 2 to 3 percent area over the quarter.

-64-

6/30-7/1/92

MR. JORDAN. It seems to me that there are only two ways
we're going to get stronger M2 growth:
If there is either a pickup in
loan demand and banks bid more aggressively so that the yield curve on
their liabilities shifts with the offering rate on time certificates
versus regular savings and so forth; or if the banking industry
decides to drop sharply the zero maturity deals. At some point there
will be yields between zero maturity liabilities from checkables and
regular savings and money market deposit accounts, versus time
certificates [that] compete with other nonbank liabilities.
MR. KOHN.
I think dropping the zero maturity yields isn't
going to help M2 growth.
In fact, that's basically the story we're
telling for the rise in velocity in the second half of this year and
into next year:
That those zero maturity yields along with the
effects of the FDIC Improvement Act (FDICIA) will be dropping offering
rates. And while some of that will just keep money [in] time deposits
to some extent, people with savings-type money in NOW accounts will be
looking elsewhere to put that money outside of M2.
So, I don't think
dropping those rates will help.
MR. JORDAN. If balances shift from reservable liabilities to
non-reserveable liabilities, we're going to see either a contraction
in bank reserves--Desk operations will be absorbing reserves--or a
build-up, temporarily at least, in excess reserves. And the banking
industry is going to be working to try to get rid of those excess
reserves.
MR. KOHN. Right, and the federal funds rate would be under
tremendous downward pressure.
MR. JORDAN.

Exactly.

MR. KOHN.
Right. And so as long as the Committee sets the
federal funds rate with an instruction to Ms. Lovett to hit it, the
reserves could contract under that situation. If the Committee were
to choose to target a reserve level and that happened, then I think
the federal funds rate would drop very substantially in the short run.
MR. JORDAN. So, we'd have a situation where bank reserves
are going down with a constant funds rate and the interpretation would
be that policy is unchanged while bank reserves are contracting?
MR. KOHN.

That depends on how one measures policy.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything further?
If not, let me get
started on the discussion.
I've puzzled about the fact that we as a
group have a fairly general, consistent notion as to how the economy
works and where we'd like it to be, and yet in yesterday's discussion
it was fairly clear that there was a very significant difference among
various [speakers].
I asked myself what is causing that to see if we
can get a firm view as to how the system is working. As best I can
judge, it all really started with Jerry Corrigan and others raising
the point that if somebody wanted to certify the outcome in the
Greenbook, we'd all say "Hurrah, that's perfect" and we'd sign off on
it right now.
I'm not aware of any of us who would argue strenuously
that the outcome in the Greenbook is substantially inappropriate and
that if it came out that way we would be anything but pleased.
The

6/30-7/1/92

-65-

question really gets down to the notion of what could prevent that
from happening.
While there were some comments--not a great number but enough
to raise an issue--that the economy could conceivably turn out to be
much stronger than the outlook in the Greenbook, the substantial
concern was that it would fall short. That is, most of you who are in
this camp suggested that the risks are on the down side, implying that
in some way the economic system would falter.
I think we have to ask
ourselves why. What is it about the system that we are now observing
If we take the
that would have that particular characteristic?
Greenbook forecast, we have a standard, old-fashioned economic
forecast with old economic relationships, as Mike Prell put it.
Maybe
I shouldn't put words in his mouth! He'll come back at me and tell me
he was misquoted! [Laughter]
I'll [ascribe that description] to
myself.
We are having a significant expansion in operating profit
margins, cash flow in the corporate sector is improving, and we are
beginning to see it in the capital goods markets. History tells us
that that process will feed in through the increased incomes and
employment that a number of people are looking for.
A conventional
expansion of the type that is in a sense expressed in the Greenbook,
or even something slightly higher, would be the normal expected
outcome.
That is what that view of the world exemplifies. Were that
in fact the case, it's pretty obvious at this stage that where we are
with monetary policy is probably where we ought to stay because there
is no obvious need to move [rates] lower; in fact one can argue that
it may be counterproductive in that context for us to move lower.
There is, however, the other model which is evolving over
time, which I would hate to be required to put into structural form
and try to estimate its parameters.
In fact, I'd even prefer not to
put it down in writing because it might get too clear!
I'm not being
facetious. There is a sense that what we're looking at really gets to
[such] a set of relationships here. Let me try it out and see where I
get because I think it would explain what the phenomenon is and would
suggest to us what to look for to test whether the hypothesis is
working. I start with something we've discussed before:
namely, to
explain the nature of the balance sheet restraint that resulted from a
significant rise in assets during the 1980s, funded by debt, and a
subsequent decline in market values of assets which created balance
sheet impairment.
The balance sheet impairment [leads] individuals
and businesses to move their cash flow from the purchase of goods and
services and investment goods toward debt reduction or other balance
sheet repairs, essentially shifting the consumption function in a
manner to generate a much higher saving rate and basically a pulling
back on investment incentives in the business sector. Now, that is a
phenomenon we have seen many times in the past--it's called [the
panics of] 1873, 1893, 1907....
It's the classic balance sheet/market
value crunch which induces a very significant liquidity freeze-up in
the banking system and induces a tremendous shift of cash flow toward
savings rather than to the purchase of goods and services. And you
get the classic Keynesian contraction at that time.
It strikes me that what we effectively have been doing since
1989, I hope more consciously than otherwise, is to take the same
adjustment process--which in the 19th century would have meant that
the economy would have gone down sharply, the balance sheets would
have been repaired reasonably quickly, and [the economy] would have

6/30-7/1/92

-66-

come back the usual way--and by injecting significant and continuous
amounts of liquidity into the system, we in effect have prevented the
liquidity freeze-up and have stretched out the adjustment process.
The question, of course, is whether there is more adjustment that has
to be done this way or less.
Or do we know?
I suspect that at this
point we don't really know. But I do think this explains, or can
explain, what basically has been happening in the last two years.
When we continue to inject liquidity in the system, the adjustment
process takes place; and when we stop injecting liquidity, after a
while the economy begins to show symptoms of weakness again. That is
another way of saying that the unmedicated economy goes back to the
way it used to behave in the 19th century and it begins to get the
[liquidity] freeze-up until we re-inject even small amounts of
liquidity and the adjustment process continues. That, I believe, can
I think it explains the
explain the Christmas effect that we had.
April injection. And the question that one has to ask is:
If this is
in fact the case, how long will it go on and what will happen if we
stop moving toward supplying liquidity when a normal adjustment
process is in fact to squeeze up the process and to tilt the economy
toward a sharply increased propensity to save rather than to consume
and go into investment goods?
If what we are seeing now is an indication that we haven't
done enough and that the last injection has petered out, then
presumably we will see some weakness in activity, which is very
difficult to explain in the context of our standard models.
In other
words, it is very difficult in my judgment to take our standard
models--to take the income flows that are moving the profit flows--and
argue other than [that we will see] an increase in activity albeit
So, the key test of which of the models is basically working
modest.
requires an evaluation of the short-term phenomena. And the reason
why in Jerry Jordan's terms we are somewhat concerned about the turn
in all of the monetary aggregates and the low level of nonfinancial
debt creation, which incidently would be obviously explained by this
process, is that one would presume that if we are dealing with a sort
of implosion propensity, we may see it in very modest financial
intermediation and presumably also in a significant softness in loan
demand, which is basically what we have.
So, if this does explain the phenomena--and let's assume that
we now have done enough and that the data for the most recent weeks
are phony and the economy is coming back--it does raise an interesting
Because if we had
question on the other side of this whole process.
been injecting significant amounts of liquidity in the system--and at
the moment I leave what I mean by that somewhat undefined--it would
follow that.when the balance sheet adjustment is complete, the level
of liquidity would be too high and we would then be required to pull
back in the growth [of money] as the economy begins to [gain strength]
and as the cash flow, which has been drawn off at least in part into
savings flows, starts to shift its proportions to a more normal .95 in
personal consumption and a much higher response in the capital goods
markets.
I might say that the argument statistically, which raises
some question about this hypothesis, is that it is difficult to find a
Granted, I'm only looking ex
significant rise in the saving rate.
post; the argument that I'm making is ex ante. Nonetheless, if there
were a significant rise in the saving rate, that would very strongly
suggest that this is a model that is functioning.

6/30-7/1/92

-67-

Now, it may well be, as we have discussed at other times,
that the personal saving rate is indeed actually higher than we are
measuring it on the grounds that the statistical discrepancy may be
reflecting a shortfall in wages and salaries or personal income. And
that particular shortfall would be consistent with the fact that
household employment data are actually much stronger than the payroll
data; indeed, some analyses by the staff suggest that the next
That might suggest, since
revision of the payroll data will be up.
personal consumption expenditures have not changed in this process,
So, it may well be
that raising income will put it all into savings.
that looking back at this period after the fact we will indeed see
That we have
what is seemingly the missing ingredient in this model:
a somewhat higher level ex post of savings than we [currently] seem to
In any event, what all of this suggests is that the
be getting.
testing of these two models as to what is happening is essentially
what we are seeing at this particular stage.
My own impression is that having eased 22 times so far [since
May 1989]--is that what it is Don?--which has to be some sort of
record, we have to be getting close to the point where this adjustment
process is beginning to come to an end.
I would suspect that at the
point it does come to an end this economy could all of a sudden show
some significant vibrancy. But, obviously, we don't have to go all
the way because if, for example, the proportion of expenditures out of
cash flow is rising, though it remains subnormal, the rate of growth
in the economy will pick up, although less than its potential.
So, I
think it would be helpful to look not only at the economy directly but
to a great extent at what is happening in the financial system for an
indication as to what is going on. Having come through all of this, I
would conclude that we have to watch very especially the nature of
what is going on in the economy. I would suspect that were we to
choose to move, say, 25 basis points and got a prime rate cut, we
probably would get 50 basis points; and if this process of liquidity
freezing up is what is occurring, then clearly that would be helpful
I don't feel overly comfortable, frankly,
at that particular time.
But I think they do
with either of these two models at this stage.
capture, as best one can, the prevailing possibilities--the major
We're undoubtedly
probabilities--of where this economy is going.
going to learn a good deal more in the next couple of weeks as to how
this is all evolving.
I conclude by saying that, after listening to the general
views regarding what this Committee is concerned about and adding up
the number of people on the Committee who have taken different views,
I am led, as I try to find the central tendency, to [propose] a mildly
asymmetric directive toward ease but with the requirement that before
any action is taken there be a telephone conference to explain why.
I'm not sure that captures everybody; I suspect it probably does not.
But having thought about trying to find where the central tendency is
--where one captures the largest number of views and concerns of this
Committee--that's pretty much where I come out. Actually, I find
myself comfortable in that position, and I would like to raise it as a
possible means by which we can resolve what is clearly a differing set
of concerns about the immediate outlook that this Committee expressed
in some detail yesterday. President Black.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman having been in the uncomfortable
position of supporting you [earlier] only 95 percent in my estimation,

-68-

6/30-7/1/92

I would like to express 100 percent agreement with this approach.
I
would add only thing:
I think we ought to include the bracketed
sentence on page 23 of the Bluebook which stresses the uncertainty.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLACK.

So,

Yes, I agree.

it's 100 percent agreement, not 98!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I originally came with an
expectation of recommending no change and a symmetric directive, but
it became clear to me in the discussion yesterday that the weakness
was not in the Twelfth District, so I certainly could accept your
recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL.
Mr. Chairman, as I said yesterday, I have
somewhat less confidence than I had in May that the recovery is on a
sustainable path. But having said that, I don't think there's any
substantial evidence that the economy is going into the tank in any
sense.
So, while there's a case to be made for some easing, I don't
think that's the more persuasive argument at the moment and I would
prefer to maintain our present policy and await further developments.
And I think there's no particular harm in having an asymmetric
directive, so I accept your proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, given my comments yesterday, I'd
favor alternative A and an easing move now, but I could accept
alternative B with asymmetric language.
Without necessarily meaning
to put you on the spot, what kind of timing [are you contemplating]
and what kinds of things might prompt the calling of a telephone
conference?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would say a fairly broad sense of
cumulative weakness beyond where we are now.
It's hard for me to be
specific; there are so many different interests. I think we all know
what the key elements are.
But an evident break in the pattern of
what we're seeing now would have to show up.
I doubt if I can be any
more specific than that.
Let me say, for example, that if auto sales
all of a sudden die, frankly, that would worry me because that has
been one of the [unintelligible].
MR. KEEHN.
like that?

You mean autos, employment, a series of things

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Plus let me say that even though we have
argued strenuously about various monetary aggregates, that is not the
same thing as saying that they are utterly irrelevant. Obviously, if
we're getting evidence that loan demand is continuing to fall and the
monetary aggregates are starting down in the context of other
weakness, we should not disregard the financial measures even though
there have been significant problems with them. At the margin, they
are probably telling us something.

6/30-7/1/92

-69-

MR. KEEHN. Just the same, my view is that we have reached a
point where some additional easing would be called for now; therefore,
But the way that you phrased "B"
I would have a preference for "A."
with asymmetric language [toward ease] would be acceptable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, for all the reasons I cited
yesterday in my references to Pavlov and his dog and so forth, I would
prefer "B" but I strongly prefer symmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I come out the same place, Alan. I feel that
At the last meeting we in effect
symmetry is an important issue.
communicated to the public--probably earlier than intended though it
should be communicated this Friday--the fact that our having moved to
symmetric language at that time was quite significant. And to move
back to asymmetry toward ease would communicate the wrong [message]
about how we ought to approach this process. There's no question
about it:
There's a lot of uncertainty now. But I don't think we can
let ourselves get whipped around by these changing expectations the
We have to take a much
same way speculators in financial markets do.
longer view and we have to be willing to look through one month or two
So, in
months; we have to be looking at quarterly or longer numbers.
a sense the message we're sending here is a very confusing one and
probably a much more significant one than anything we might do with
"Look at what we do
It gets back to the issue of:
long-run ranges.
and not what we say," but this is something that we say that's much
more significant, I think, than the long-term ranges.
The reason I come out where I do is that first of all, I
think we have an expansion in place somewhere around the economy's
I think at a minimum monetary policy is consistent with
potential.
that expansion process.
In other words, I don't have the sense that
the economy is being choked by any means on the liquidity front. As
the expansion progresses and it comes through in a number of ways--you
just said it yourself in your comments and I think it's implicit in
some things in the Bluebook--we're going to have to be going in the
other direction. And to be thinking about additional ease now makes
that next job that much tougher. Again, I don't want to flip-flop.
In general,
It's really in the context of where we were last time.
thinking along those lines at this stage has some important
credibility effects which could be reflected in long markets and in
I don't really put much credence in
the foreign exchange market.
declines in longer-term yields that are supposedly associated with
I think what tends to happen is that when that
expectations of ease.
sense develops, speculators [find] that a very effective vehicle in
which to speculate. That's where one gets the most bang for the buck.
The speculators get in there; they may drive yields down temporarily
but in the event you could have a lot of sellers [who are] very
So, I take heart in the fact that whatever
disappointed.
disappointment was reflected in our moving to asymmetry last time
washed out fairly quickly and long-term yields worked their way down.
Obviously, they may have come down a little further on some of this
speculative behavior I'm describing, but I think that's how we're
going to make our contribution. We took a stand last time and I think
this is the time to stay with it.

6/30-7/1/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

-70-

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think we're at or near a point where
we're going to have to ease, and asymmetry is broadly consistent with
that.
I'm sure all of us wish we had some stable beacon way off out
there in the fog that we could latch onto and [unintelligible], but
the fact is that there isn't that kind of beacon. While we may not be
very happy that we have to look at these current economic indicators,
in fact that's all there is right now that we can look at.
And if the
economy begins to weaken again, which I think already has started, it
probably will need another shot of liquidity. We ought not fight
that; we ought to accept it and move with it and do the best we can.
I would not wait all that long.
I don't think we need a whole lot of
evidence piled on top of what we have to reach the point for easing.
Also, if we get to that point, I wouldn't automatically think in terms
of just a quarter point on the funds rate. A quarter point may bring
down the prime rate but it may not.
I don't think we need another
present [such as the one] we gave the economy last December, but we
could very well think in terms of 1/2 point on the discount rate and
something comparable to that on the funds rate.
So, I think we're
looking at an easing move, and I suspect we'll have one before we sit
around this table again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. In some ways it seems strange, I suppose, to be
confident at times such as these, but I ask myself what we need to do
to have long bond rates lower by September 1 and I am very, very
confident that [the answer] is for us to do as you suggest and that is
to stand pat.
I believe that the Federal Reserve does control longrun bond prices; it's much tougher than [controlling] the fed funds
rate, but if we're going to control long bond prices, we have to do it
by focusing on that [rate].
The uncertainty inflation premium is very
disruptive to economic growth. I'm also confident that economic
growth will be stronger if we stand pat and if we give the world a
sense that we are indeed an independent central bank that has its eye
upon the one thing we can do and that is to create an environment of
price stability. That adds not only to long-run growth but I believe
it adds to short-run growth in this environment.
I understand that
the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony has been pretty well determined, and
I'm thinking about how our commitment to price level stability would
come out if before that [testimony] or at that time [we were to ease]
We know that's not what is our guide, but the world will see it as a
capitulation. It seems to me it would undermine that testimony that I
understood you wanted to be there as a substitute for lowering the
monetary aggregates growth ranges.
Now, like John LaWare and Tom Melzer, I strongly prefer
symmetric language because that really is standing pat.
I wonder,
with the attention on symmetry that took place last time, whether we
will get through the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony without this being
known. It seems to me that even going from symmetry back to asymmetry
sends a signal of uncertainty that the market doesn't need.
So, I
strongly prefer symmetric language.
I heard what you said in regard
to the way you're going to make your choices and I didn't hear
anything about M2 being the guiding factor in that.
So, in a sense,
I'm very supportive of what you're saying, but I'm very concerned

6/30-7/1/92

-71-

about being in the same voting group with others who certainly want to
ease quickly.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I, too, would prefer a symmetric directive at
this point mainly because I think we shouldn't be in too big a hurry
to take any action in the near term and should be prepared to assess a
range of incoming data. I don't know which of your two models may be
It seems to me that another
more appropriate in the current setting.
way to describe what is going on--in terms of a sluggish recovery,
small gains in employment, small gains in spending, balance sheet
restructuring, and all that--is that it's part of the price that has
to be paid to bring down the rate of inflation. Perhaps if our
credibility were higher, the price would be lower and we wouldn't have
to endure some of this and we would see incoming numbers perhaps more
to our intuitive liking. But I've become convinced, unfortunately,
that our credibility really isn't all that high and that a period like
this is probably what we have to endure to make progress on that side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

I would prefer to ease to accommodate the
MS. PHILLIPS.
restructuring, but I could live with an asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support "B" and I would strongly
prefer symmetric language; I identify myself with President Melzer and
But I would not vote
Governor Angell among others and their comments.
"no" on an asymmetric directive because I do share your concern and
others' concerns that [the economy] could possibly be faltering
If it became clear-seriously here, although I very much doubt that.
and I do mean clear, at the risk of being what some would call too
late--that we were having a seriously faltering economy, then I could
support an easing. Consequently, I would not vote against an
asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

I guess the
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is a tough one.
way I try to approach a lot of this financial confusion is that in my
mind's eye I can conceivably see three profiles of the economy over
the next several quarters. Each looks to me as if it has profoundly
It is possible, although I think it's only a
different implications.
10 percent probability, that we could have a 3-1/2 percent [growth]
profile.
If that turned out to be the case, the policy response to
We'd have to start tightening. Then there is
that is pretty easy:
the 2-1/2 percent economy, an economy that as I said yesterday is
I
quite consistent with the price stability goal based on Chart 17.
do think that that's the likely outcome.
I would still put a 50
And the policy response to that is also
percent probability on that.
But then there's the third
easy:
We'd just sit where we are.
scenario, the 1-1/2 percent profile, which in my mental processes
carries with it something like a 40 percent probability. Now, that's
the tough nut, because I personally believe, in the broadest possible
context of public policy, that that outcome is unacceptable. Also, if
we find ourselves in that profile after the fact and we're left in a

-72-

6/30-7/1/92

position in which we were
think we'd have a helluva
is not an inconsequential
rather squarely associate

trying to adjust policy after the fact, I
problem on our hands.
Because I think there
probability of that kind of outcome, I would
myself with an asymmetric directive.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, this obviously is as tough a
situation for deciding what to do in the immediate situation, [as
we've had] in some substantial period of time. But I must say that,
for my own reasons, I find myself having views that are very similar
to Jerry Corrigan's.
In looking at the reasons, I find myself quite
attracted to the second model as compared to the conventional model,
in terms of what is happening with the economy. A part of that is
looking at the serial optimism that has been in my own forecast based
on the conventional model going back for some time and looking at the
optimism that has been in all of our forecasts on a conditional basis.
I am aware of the concerns that if the second model is [true] it means
that inevitably we are overshooting and putting in too much liquidity,
but I think we can sop that up afterwards.
And what that tells me is
that we need a more activist policy in terms of not being so concerned
about relatively small movements in the funds rate.
Though I think we
come at this from somewhat different analytical schools, I am
attracted to some of the questions that Jerry Jordan raised about
credibility in the sense that if we said we're going to do something
on the Ms but we're not doing it. I don't like the excuse that we were
unwilling to move the funds rate to [achieve that].
Also, looking at
what we might do right now, I do think that a move in the prime rate
would be beneficial for the economy as a whole; I don't have a lot of
concern that we'd see too much stimulus out of that, and I think we'd
get [a prime rate cut if we eased].
To tell you the truth, in the
absence of the jawboning that we've had from the Administration--if we
weren't in such an awkward position--I would generally prefer to do
something at this meeting. I have to disagree with Ed a little in
that under ordinary circumstances I would have preferred [a cut of] 25
basis points at the meeting today. But in the environment we're in,
with this amount of jawboning, I'd be cautious about pushing too hard
for that.
Where all of this leads me, to go back to Bob Black's
analogy, is that I'm 60/40 in favor of what you're doing but that's
heavily weighted by the notion that I think we should be asymmetric
toward ease. And the indication that you've given that we would have
a conference call to deal with that assuages my own concerns that we
should generally [act] at meetings or when there is full Committee
consultation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I took your reference to 22 moves to be cuts in
the funds rate over a period of time and then you made a reference to
[that] coming to an end.
If we're still on a track toward at least a
lower inflation environment if not stable prices, measured somehow,
then it shouldn't be the end of the moves because 3-3/4 percent is
still too high whether one thinks in terms of real rates or
[unintelligible].
The one reason that might be given for either going
back to an asymmetric directive or to cut the funds rate now or in the
future that I would oppose is weakness in the economy. If we're going
to do something, that's the wrong reason to do it because it
reinforces the idea that we try to fine-tune policy actions to

6/30-7/1/92

-73-

influence things we can't influence. Whatever uncertainty we have
about the aggregates, I have more confidence in their giving us and
the public at large information about the long run [unintelligible]-where it's going to be next year and the year after--than the latest
numbers produced by the Commerce Department or the BLS or the
We
purchasing managers or realtors or any other particular group.
have a lot of uncertainty about those numbers [as well as] a
tremendous amount of uncertainty [about] M2, but we can signal that we
have more confidence in the [money] numbers by changing the funds rate
based on them. Not doing it based on the Ms, I think, is not helpful
to our longer-run case in terms of credibility.
I'm in a difficult position because we are below target on M2
and the decision has now been made not to lower the range for this
year or next year.
To be consistent then, given the model that we use
for influencing the aggregates, we should be lowering the funds rate
in order to show how serious we are about coming in at least at the
bottom end of the range.
That's so we will be credible when we say
that the opposite is also true--that when we're at the top end of the
So, failure to cut the
range we're not going to hesitate then either.
funds rate, given what is going on in the markets today, is in my mind
a relative tightening policy action compared to the market, and I
don't see any basis for that. Reserves are falling and all of the
aggregates [are weak], and I think that's something we should not be
But at the same time I would resist cutting the
willing to tolerate.
I'd like to do it
funds rate on a signal of weak economic activity.
today, but I wanted to do it today coupled with an announcement that
we cut the target ranges for the long run at the same time we cut the
funds rate and then let the analysts figure out whether we tightened
or eased.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. As I look at the discussion that we've had and
I think it is
your models, I prefer your second model as well.
suggesting that we still have an environment in the economy generally
of great uncertainty and the building of liquidity. And in that
context staying where we are is, as Jerry stated, a tightening. In
addition, it's not just the money numbers but other financial
information and the financial environment that suggest that we could
My strong preference, then, would be to ease now;
and should ease.
It's consistent
however, I can live with an asymmetric directive.
with where I was at least last time. And if the information comes in,
given the way you answered President Keehn, I can live with that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.
If we're not going to decide to ease today, then
I would support your recommendation for "B" but with a symmetric
It may become necessary to ease a little later and if so
directive.
But if it's not necessary
it can be done with a symmetric directive.
to ease later and we don't end up easing, I think symmetric language
in the record would serve us better than asymmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I very much appreciate your
efforts to find a consensus. What has struck me about the challenge

-74-

6/30-7/1/92

to the independence of the Federal Reserve is a need for us to speak
with one voice as much as possible. Frankly, I find myself torn
between your recommendation, which I will support, and President
Jordan's recommendation which I also could support were he chairman!
[Laughter]
The reason I think his argument is compelling and I think
your argument is compelling is that I believe both will end up
iterating in the same direction. But we face tremendous
uncertainties, tremendous challenges, both in the economic arena and
in the political arena. And I would hope that your search for a
consensus would produce one in this Committee because I do realize
that the challenges you personally have ahead of you in the next month
are great.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
We have an environment with both weakness in
the aggregates, which we've seen for some time, and the risk of
weakness in the real economy.
So, I think "B" asymmetric toward ease
is appropriate.
MR. BLACK.
I'm not sure I'd say the same thing if I were
speaking again.
I supported the Chairman but then on further
reflection I thought that if we had lowered the targets for next year
I would support him more enthusiastically, if I may put it that way.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I am proposing a vote for a mildly
asymmetric directive; that's alternative B with the presumption of a
telephone conference prior to any move that might be initiated under
that directive. Do you want to read the language?
MR. BERNARD.
[Does the Committee wish to use the additional
sentence proposed in the Bluebook, which reads]:
"However, the recent
unusual behavior of these aggregates suggests that the relationship
between their growth and the Committee's long-run objectives is
especially uncertain at this time."
MR. LAWARE.

Do we want to say "especially uncertain at this

SPEAKER(?).

I don't like that "especially."

time?"

MR. SYRON.
uncertain enough!

Governor LaWare has a point.

"Uncertain" is

MR. BLACK.

We can say "slightly" or "somewhat."

MR. SYRON.

"Could" be uncertain or "would" be uncertain.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
at this time?
MR. MULLINS.
MR. ANGELL.
"especially" out.

Do we really need that sentence in here

We've already got it regarding the

'92 range.

I think we need the sentence in, but I'd take

-75-

6/30-7/1/92

Should we take
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What's the view on that?
"especially" out or keep it in? How many people feel "especially"
would be better?
MR. SYRON.

Please.

MR. LAWARE.

I don't like the sentence.

SPEAKER(?).

I don't like the sentence either.

Why don't we do this; why don't we have
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the whole thing read and let's see what it sounds like.
MR. ANGELL.

With "especially" out.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

With "especially" out in the reading.

"In the implementation of policy for the
MR. BERNARD.
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
In the context of the Committee's
of pressure on reserve positions.
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint might or
slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected
to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 in the period from June
through September at annual rates of about 2 and 1/2 percent,
respectively. However, the recent unusual behavior of these
aggregates suggests that the relationship between their growth and the
Committee's long-run objectives is uncertain at this time."
SPEAKER(?).

Sounds bad.

If we take the sentence out, how can we live
MR. ANGELL.
with the 2 percent and the 1/2 percent?
SPEAKER(?).

That's the problem.

MR. ANGELL. What do we have besides 2 percent and 1/2
If we say "about" and we
What is a better number than 2?
percent?
want to be symmetric around it what number would you choose, Don?
MR. KOHN.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. KOHN.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, let's see.

Do you want a whole number?

No, I don't-We gave you our best guess, i.e.,

2 percent.

2 percent.

MR. LINDSEY. It's 2 percent for M2 and 1/2 percent for M3;
that's what 2 and 1/2 mean; there are two lines.
MR. ANGELL.

Oh, I see--2, okay.

MR. JORDAN. I am missing something here because the prior
sentence refers to June through September.

-76-

6/30-7/1/92

MR. KOHN.

Right.

MR. JORDAN. And the latter sentence says that their
relationship to the long-run objectives is uncertain. Uncertain with
respect to what?
Is that compared to before or compared to something
that we're less uncertain about?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there has to be a sentence in
there but I feel uncomfortable with this sentence as it's constructed.
MR. SYRON.

You're absolutely right;

it's a problem.

MR. ANGELL. Well, why don't we take "long-run" out?
"suggests that the relationship between their growth and the
Committee's objectives is uncertain at this time."
MR. MELZER.

Say

Do we have more confidence in the funds rate?

MR. KOHN. It's certainly the case that this problem will be
addressed extensively in the policy record as well as the [directive];
The draft sentence was
it's in the paragraph on the long-run ranges.
a response to a request made at the last meeting.
MR. MULLINS.

Is it like the Surgeon General's warning?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, I think the recent behavior of these

aggregates--

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Perhaps to make it more operational
we could say "However, the recent unusual behavior of the aggregates
warrants especially close monitoring by the Committee" or something
like that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I agree we do want to solve the
question.
It's obviously making this relationship more uncertain than
We basically have a problem [in that we need]
usual, whatever it is.
to stipulate the reasons why we are putting in these rather low
numbers.
Because if we believe them and those were really functional
with respect to the economy, then I think it's incumbent on us, as
What we're trying to say here
Jerry has been saying, to move them up.
That while we're putting down these very low
is a qualification:
numbers, our view of the importance of these numbers is far less than
That's where the issue is.
is usually the case.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Right.

MR. KOHN. The sentence feeds back into the previous sentence
or the two sentences before.
It says that in the context of the
Committee's long-run objectives you will be looking at monetary
So, we've already sort of said that and this kind of-developments.
MR. MULLINS. We could say something like "in view of the
unusual behavior, we expect growth to be 2 percent and 1/2 percent."
MR. SYRON. Using 2 percent and 1/2 percent, I would think
we'd want to focus further on the short run by saying that the
Committee is particularly aware of the unusual relationship that
exists with the monetary aggregates.
I'd just add something like that

-77-

6/30-7/1/92

tagged on the end, which is not specific to our objectives. This
[proposed language] raises as many questions as the problem [we're
trying to address].
Why don't we just say that the Committee was
acutely aware that the behavior [of the aggregates] has been unusual-not necessarily in those exact words.
MR. JORDAN. The previous sentence says "The contemplated
Is that
reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with...."
The last sentence suggests, though it's not
where the uncertainly is?
clear to me, [not] what is consistent with reserves but what it means
for the long run.
MR. ANGELL.
I think you've hit it, Jerry.
I think that's
where the uncertainty is.
We're not certain whether the contemplated
reserve conditions are consistent with-MR. SYRON.

That's exactly right.

MR. BOEHNE. Then, why don't we just say:
"The contemplated
reserve conditions, although more uncertain than usual, are expected
to be consistent" etc.
MR. KOHN.
uncertain.

I don't think it's the conditions that are

MR. SYRON. The point is that we don't know whether they are
expected to be consistent; we have less expectation of consistency.
MR. LINDSEY.
Do we have to have the "contemplated" sentence
in there?
Does the law require us to have a sentence that says "the
contemplated reserve conditions"?
MR. KOHN.

No, no.

MR. LINDSEY. Why don't we drop the whole issue since we're
addressing it elsewhere?
MR. MULLINS.
[unintelligible].

We put in forecasts and people notice

MR. KOHN. Well, part of the idea behind putting this
sentence in was to give a sense of flexibility--that you wouldn't have
to react to this.
Without such a sentence here the directive doesn't
relate at all to the long-run ranges, which may be fine.
MR. MELZER.
Just by stating those low growth rates on the
very face of it we've indicated that we're willing to accept those
growth rates even though they are below the target range. That is the
confusion we're trying to clear up with that last sentence. I think
we could take the last sentence out altogether.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that we could say "The
contemplated reserve conditions are not likely to cause the monetary
aggregates to return to their targeted ranges."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We could say "may not."

6/30-7/1/92

-78-

MR. ANGELL. Yes, "may not be consistent with the aggregates
returning to their ranges."
MR. SYRON.
"During this period" or "in this period of
uncertainty" or something like that.
MR. LAWARE.
Isn't it somewhat contradictory, though, to say
that we're tilting toward ease and that it's going to result in a
lower growth rate for M2 and M3?
MR. ANGELL.

Well, in a way not, because if we were--

MR. LAWARE.

That's the way it reads!

MR. BLACK. I think we could take that last sentence and
attach it to the one before and say "in light of the recent unusual
behavior of these aggregates."
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I hesitate to inject this but
perhaps the thought that people have is that the Committee is adopting
a policy that would be expected to move the aggregates back toward the
range unless the recent unusual behavior of velocity persists. That
would be a correct statement, but a non-quantitative one.
MR. ANGELL. I think that's accurate. I don't think we
expect that.
Look at this chart in the Bluebook and where "B" is.
MR. PRELL. But that assumes that the recent unusual behavior
persists. What I'm saying is that unless it persists you'd expect
[growth of M2] to move back because we would not expect to end up the
year with only 2-1/2 percent [M2 growth] given our GDP forecast if
normal velocity behavior were to resume.
MR. ANGELL. But Mike, Don's chart shows "A" and "B" below
not only the cone but below the parallel lines. Both "A" and "B" are
below the parallel lines and we ought to communicate-MR. PRELL.
I'm saying that isn't necessarily what is known
to be the operative element in your policy concern.
It is contingent
on a continuation of unusually strong velocity. If you didn't get it,
then you would expect [the aggregates] to come back.
I apologize for
the diversion.
MR. HOENIG. The ranges we have now reflect an expectation
that these [aggregates] are going to fall below [for the year], and I
think we should drop that last sentence because it only adds-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's try Jerry's suggestion for the
last try at this because we're not-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is an alternative sentence that
would say:
"These growth rates in the monetary aggregates are a
reflection of the continuing, uncertain relationships between the
aggregates and the Committee's long-term objectives."
MR. JORDAN. But I thought it was the uncertainty about the
Board staff's model and what interest rate and reserve conditions

6/30-7/1/92

-79-

would produce certain aggregates.
There's a velocity issue and-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.
MR. MELZER.

Why don't we drop this whole thing?

Where are you going to start to drop?
Starting with "however"?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

There are two separate things:

Starting with "however."

And ending with "time."

MR. SYRON. I think that's a better suggestion.
The problem
is:
Do we really think that these reserve conditions are expected to
be consistent in the world that we're in now?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me put it this way. I would almost
[be tempted] to drop the "contemplated reserve conditions" sentence.
MR. SYRON.

Yes, that's what I would prefer.

MR. ANGELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, if we're going to delegate
to you some [asymmetry], why can't we delegate to you [the task of]
carefully going over this until you're satisfied that you have a
[good] sentence?
I would prefer to give you the authority to clean
that up or take it out, whichever one you want.
MR. SYRON.

Good idea.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That would be helpful if you would.
I have any serious questions, I will re-circulate a draft to the
Committee if that's okay with everybody.

If

MR. ANGELL. Yes, it would be better than our trying to
manufacture [one as we sit here].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, this is a tough one.
don't we leave that and go to a vote.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Hoenig
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Syron

Okay, why

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay, our next meeting is on August the
18th, and we can adjourn for lunch.
END OF MEETING

