Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 6, 1992

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 6, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Hoenig
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Melzer
Mullins
Phillips
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. R. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Munnell,
Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations

-2Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Broaddus, Dewald, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum
Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, St. Louis,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and
Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. Judd and Sniderman, and Ms. White, Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco
Cleveland, and New York, respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
October 6, 1992
I think it is most appropriate for me to
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
comment that as far as I can judge we've been handling the issue of
I haven't seen the slightest indication
confidentiality awfully well.
of any breach of security out of these meetings--the last two--and I
merely wanted to note that fact and hope that whatever it is we're
With that, I'd like to request a motion to
doing we continue to do.
approve the minutes.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

Move it.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. As you know, today
is the first meeting in which Bill McDonough is in charge of both
Desks in New York; he took over obviously very recently. And I'd like
to call on Bill for his usual start--the Foreign Desk report.
MR. MCDONOUGH.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

[Statement--see

Any questions for Bill?

You ended on a note about staying alert to early
MR. BOEHNE.
signs of a run on the dollar. But there really isn't much one can do
Essentially, we have interest rates to
in terms of contingency plans.
deal with that and we have foreign exchange operations to deal with
that, and foreign exchange operations have shown that they're not
effective in [countering] these kinds of massive movements in capital
Domestic concerns would make an interest rate movement not a
flows.
What else is on that list that
good course. That exhausts my list.
one can do if this kind of situation should materialize?
MR. MCDONOUGH.
Intervention is unlikely to be highly
effective because it would be very difficult under the circumstances
It is tough to be effective
to organize a coordinated intervention.
I think it's a tool and, quoting President
intervening on our own.
Corrigan at the last meeting, I'd be inclined to say "never say
The reason it would
It is something that we may want to use.
never."
be difficult to organize a coordinated intervention is that most of
the Europeans don't have any deutschemarks, which would be the
currency of intervention. And the Bundesbank, I would think, probably
would want commitments from the Chairman on the future of monetary
Because of
policy that I suspect he would be very reluctant to give.
their concern about what [intervention] did to the management of their
money supply, it would be a fairly tough argument to make in any case.
In the midst of a political campaign, if one or more of the candidates
could be induced to say that a weak dollar policy is not what he has
in mind, that could be somewhat useful if it were done with good
timing.
MR. JORDAN. Earlier this year we heard some things about the
difficulties the Germans were having with sterilization and their
desire to see us diversify

10/6/92

and so forth. What were they saying during September
about their problems with the other countries? And was that a
constraint on our options?
MR. MCDONOUGH. Well, all during September we were very much
in the mode of not wishing to intervene because of the likely
counterproductive effect on [our] domestic markets, especially the
Therefore, in fact, I didn't have any discussions of
bond market.
"What if...?" or "What do you think we should do?" with them. At that
time the main thing that would have inhibited any desire by the
Germans to do an intervention operation with us is that they very much
wanted the ERM to come apart in order to stop having the monetary
policy problems they had and to establish what they think is the
single most important principle of the mechanism, i.e. that it be
So, I think the main concern they had was purely internally
flexible.
European.
So, our actions would have appeared to be trying
MR. JORDAN.
to hold the ERM together?
MR. MCDONOUGH.
MR. JORDAN.

Right.

And they didn't want to hold it together.

When we did intervention operations
MR. MCDONOUGH. Exactly.
during the summer, the other European countries were just delighted
The Germans
every time we even mentioned the [possibility] of it.
were much more reluctant, but they didn't want to get "noticed" as
being against an operation which the other Europeans saw as positive
because in weakening the mark it helped them keep the system together.
MR. JORDAN. Your remark about [intervention] giving us
Was that because if you're selling deutschemarkdomestic problems:
denominated securities you are going to be sterilizing them by buying
domestic-denominated securities?
MR. MCDONOUGH. The technical monetary effect of the
It was the
intervention wasn't what we were concerned about.
psychological effect of an unsuccessful intervention operation on
other markets.
MR. JORDAN. The psychological effect is one thing, but the
idea is that if you sold deutschemark-denominated securities, you'd be
buying U.S. Treasuries.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

Right.

Given the position
MR. JORDAN. And that would be helpful.
of other central banks now with deutschemarks and given our desire to
reduce our holdings of deutschemark-denominated assets, do you have an
opportunity to do off-market sales of some of our deutschemark
holdings and, the counterpart, to buy more Treasuries?
MR. MCDONOUGH.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

10/6/92

MR. MCDONOUGH.

MR. JORDAN. One last question:
Going forward, if we do
start to get more stability--even firmness--of the dollar, what is
your attitude going to be toward moving into the market and still
reducing our position in deutschemarks?
MR. MCDONOUGH. As you know, we have this [conumdrum] with
the Treasury, and about 55 to 60 percent of U.S. reserves belong to
this Committee and the rest belong to the Treasury. Perhaps
understandably, given everything else that has been going on, the
Treasury has not been able to focus on the whole issue of reserve
levels or management since we've had these discussions this year with
the Committee.
I think realistically what we have to do is wait until
after the election and until this Treasury team or whatever Treasury
team is prepared to talk about it, and then we can come back to the
Committee.
MR. TRUMAN. President Jordan, two points seem to need to be
added here.
One is that in the second phase--the September phase of
all this--I at least detected from my own contacts that there was
essentially no pressure on us from the other Europeans to operate. We
So, they too were not
did not have the same thing going in August.
On the last point, I think
looking for us to get involved in Europe.
it's worthwhile sharing with the Committee the current attitude of the
Treasury, which was that they were not interested in sharing the
That's why you are about to approve the entire
operation with Sweden.
It is my
$400 million. So, there is a certain reluctance there.
judgment, certainly, that these are not the right circumstances to put
that issue squarely to the Treasury. It is probably better to wait
until things settle down.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK.
I just want to commend those of you who had a
part in the decision for having tried to urge the Treasury not to do
I think you proved your point very well.
this intervention.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Bill, I just want to be sure that I didn't
Did you say that you thought the
mishear something you said before.
market had--"built in" is too strong a phrase--a sort of preponderance
of expectation of a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate?
MR. MCDONOUGH.

The foreign exchange market, yes.

To the extent
MR. SYRON. I was just going to ask you this:
one can reconcile that with the question Ed Boehne raised on your
point regarding concern about a potential break away on the down side,
is the market seeing that as a factor that might lead to this break
away?
Is that a factor they see that might or might not lead to this?
No.
It could happen, but my judgment is that
MR. MCDONOUGH.
the highly expected 25 basis point easing in the funds rate would not
do much of anything in the foreign exchange market.

10/6/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY.
How effective have the Germans been in
I think short-term rates have come down a fair amount,
sterilizing?
which would suggest that they have [not completed the sterilization]
They definitely don't have all of these
MR. MCDONOUGH.
operations sterilized yet; I don't have a good feel of what would be a
reasonable percentage.
In many respects, given the magnitudes that Bill
MR. TRUMAN.
described, which are unprecedented in terms of anything I've heard of
[unintelligible], I think they have been remarkably successful--so
remarkably successful in fact that they had already put the markets
back in a position in which they were net short of funds at the end of
the maintenance period last week, which is one of the ways the Germans
In talking to people at the
were able to stabilize the situation.
Bundesbank--though every person one talks to probably would give a
different answer on that question--my impression is that at a very
technical level they have been able to force some changes in their own
operating procedures, but nothing like the price system to
But they have been quite successful in
[unintelligible] instruments.
However, there's a big dispute within the Bundesbank
the first round.
that goes back decades about whether one can fully sterilize any of
these operations.
The only way I could understand it is that if you
have large capital flows, it is not clear that you could return the
liability side of the central bank's balance sheet to its status quo
ante.
But it's not clear with that and the same interest rates that
you have changes in the demand for money that will give you different
money supply numbers, a change in the multipliers, or whatever you
want to call it.
There's a lot of dispute within the Bundesbank
itself about whether one can truly sterilize the [effect on the] money
That's at a different level, I think.
supply.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

If not,
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Any further questions for Bill?
would somebody like to move to ratify the actions taken by the Desk
since the last meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. KELLEY.

introduce

I move it.

Second.

Without objection.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Joan Lovett officially?

Bill, would you

MR. MCDONOUGH.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
There are two
things I've learned by this the fourth business day of responsibility
Deciding
for the Open Market Desk, judging from the first three days:
exactly how to go about adding or subtracting reserves and in what
amount is a lot tougher than I think anybody, especially me, realized.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Arithmetic is a pretty rough activity!

The
It has been an interesting baptism.
MR. MCDONOUGH.
smartest thing I could possibly do was not to fake it for the whole
period and, therefore, Joan Lovett will give the report.

10/6/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go ahead.

Welcome.

MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman; thank you, Bill.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The bond market was about 1/4 point
lower this morning and I think the bill
rate is up about 3 or 4 basis
points.
Is there any commentary around as to what this type of mood
is suggesting?
MS. LOVETT.

This morning?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MS. LOVETT. The early read we got was that a technical
adjustment had been taking place in the market yesterday afternoon as
the stock market recovered from its lows.
And with the world stock
market this
morning also tending to recover from the lows seen
yesterday, there is just what one would call normal, technical
position adjustments taking place.
There didn't seem to be anything
more fundamental than that at work.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Joan, I know this most recent reserve period
started off with continued pressure on the funds rate.
I don't know
if that has continued into this week or not.
Were you surprised by
that?
I know the quarter-end has passed and we may still have
Treasury balance problems and so forth. How do you evaluate that?
MS. LOVETT. We were somewhat surprised. The quarter had
finished on a firm note. We really thought that we had put in
[enough] reserves and made an allowance for even higher-than-normal
excess reserves for the quarter-end, but we had a very large miss.
Therefore, the next morning, which was the beginning of this
maintenance period, the funds market started out on the firm side; and
sometimes that carries over. But I have to say we were surprised by
the carryover firmness because it was the first day of the maintenance
period and the banks had the whole remainder [of the period to adjust]
and it was also prior to the time when there were widespread
expectations that the Fed would be cutting the rate.
So, we're having
a very difficult time trying to understand why people would pay these
higher rates so early on.
The rates aren't consistent with the
reserve numbers either. Reserves don't show [a need for us] to put in
that volume of reserves.
So, we've been surprised by it.
The market
hasn't been as surprised because they think the need is bigger than we
are saying.
This is one of those periods where right after the
quarter-end the Treasury balances plummet because they have to pay out
these social security [checks].
And the market, even though it knows
that, thinks the need is bigger. So, the market hasn't been as
surprised about the firmness of the funds rate as we have been. The
firmness that we're hearing about is coming more or less from regional
sources, and we just don't have a satisfactory explanation for it.
MR. MCDONOUGH. The first couple of days were aggravated, as
was the September 30th quarter-end, when Bank of America's computers
went down about halfway through the day on Wednesday. And I believe,
Bob, they didn't
get them fully back up until yesterday.

10/6/92

MR. PARRY.

Wells Fargo had a problem too.

MR. MCDONOUGH. Well, I didn't know that.
Bank of America is
usually a pretty good size supplier of fed funds, so I think that was
probably at least a marginal contributor.
But it isn't the whole
explanation of why funds have been quite as tight as they have been.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It was also in the context, as I recall,
of days when the bill rate was actually easing quite considerably.
MS. LOVETT. The fact that the funds rate hasn't behaved
quite the way it should has been largely ignored by the market thus
far.
It is seen as something that's technically driven at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Do the traders look at any of the various
measures of bank reserves, the monetary base, or monetary aggregates
in forming their expectations about Fed actions?
They
I guess I could answer that in two ways.
MS. LOVETT.
look at those kinds of aggregates broadly in terms of their impact on
policy, but I think they see that impact as being somewhat removed.
They look more closely at their estimates of reserve requirements as
an operating factor that we have to contend with. And I think that's
as close as their focus would go on that.
MR. JORDAN. What would it take to get them to move away from
focusing on the perception of a weak economy to looking at some kind
of monetary indicator in determining what we do?
MS. LOVETT. Well, the market looks at what it thinks the
Federal Reserve acts on; they feel reasonably confident that that is
the thing to do.
They don't see the monetary aggregates as being the
They find it very difficult to
driving force to policy right now.
read what the aggregates are saying, and everything they read says the
So, they don't tend to look at them that closely.
Committee does too.
MR. JORDAN.
So, at the moment, if miraculously M2 and M3
started to soar as in Germany and if Ml and the base plunged--again as
in Germany--the Street wouldn't react to it as long as they thought we
were going to react to unfolding real economic indicators?
MS. LOVETT. They don't ignore the money numbers by any
Some people are
stretch of the imagination; they do look at them.
commenting a lot about the rapid growth of M1 being a harbinger of
trouble, but others aren't.
Some say one can't look at that because
the Fed is looking at the broader aggregates. Nobody understands
If they thought we were
fully or positively what is going on here.
going to be acting on it or if they thought we should be because the
growth rates are out of historical experience, then they would respond
to it.
MR. JORDAN. One more question:
How do you reconcile the
perception that in the long run we have big problems--fiscal stimulus,
inflation, and all of that--with the constant drumbeat of the need for
What is it they want
us to ease because of weak economic conditions?
us to do?
Do they want us [unintelligible] or don't they?

10/6/92

MR. MCDONOUGH.
I think the attention span of most people who
trade securities is relatively short.
[Laughter]
The big thinkers
have tomorrow in mind!
Seriously, one of the things that makes them
think that way is that their bonus systems are based on thinking for
rather quick gratification rather than longer term.
Going back to
your earlier question, in most of the firms the Fed watchers have
become much less important than the traders.
And the traders very
much look at psychology; they're getting more and more married to the
black box which says that the past is the mirror of the future.
So it
has changed a great deal from the period when the Fed watchers and the
economists in the big trading firms were really quite powerful.
I
think there would have to be an extended period of this
[unintelligible] off to concentrate on the monetary variables for a
change to take place because the firms would have to recast their own
internal structures and to whom they listen.
MR. JORDAN. But that dichotomy suggests that it's not
necessarily inconsistent, given what is going on there, for the
perception to be simultaneously that we're too tight and that we need
to ease and we're in the process of inflating.
MS. LOVETT.

Right.

MR. MCDONOUGH.
MR. KOHN.
MS. LOVETT.

Exactly.

Then we'll have to tighten later.
Right.

MR. KOHN. I take that back.
I think we've had something of
a contradiction in this whole episode of an upward sloped yield curve
which suggests that at some point--[unintelligible] through liquidity
premiums or whatnot--rates would have to come back up again and [given
the] immediate expectations of consumers or constant disappointment
with how the economy is turning out, the Fed will ease. So, I don't
think there is anything new.
If anything has happened over the last
three or four months, it's that the middle part of the yield curve-the one, two, and three-year part--has really come down quite a bit,
particularly after the June employment report.
So, a sense of when
the rates would have to go up has been pushed out [in time].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'm sure I shouldn't read this and I
don't have his permission, but I insist. This is a Corrigan-gram
which says we could put Bill and Joan on the road.
[Laughter]
MS. LOVETT.

I don't know what that means!

MR. MELZER.

At whose expense, right?

MR. MCDONOUGH.

[Laughter]

I think we'd like to discuss that Corrigan-

gram!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any further questions?
If
not, I think we have to get the ratification very quickly. Would
somebody like to move the ratification?
MR. MELZER.

Move it.

10/6/92

MR. SYRON.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Messrs. Prell and Truman.
MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]
MR. TRUMAN.

Without

Thank you, Mr.

objection.

Chairman.

Let's move on now to

[Statement--see

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions

for either?

MR. BOEHNE.
Mike, would you elaborate some on your comment
about going from 3 percent to zero--and presumably we could [even]
have a negative real [federal funds rate].
It's an article of faith
for anybody who has taken one or certainly two economics classes that
lower interest rates are going to be a positive [for] growth, and I'm
not quarreling with that orthodoxy.
But when one goes out and talks
with people in the business community and consumers, one almost
invariably runs into the view that lower rates are not the [solution].
If I probe that, an answer I frequently get is:
"If I thought
interest rates were going to stay down, then lower rates would help.
But if you lower interest rates now, I know you'll have to raise them
a few months or a year down the road.
Just knowing that rates are
going to be down for a short period doesn't help me because I'm going
to have to finance whatever I'm going to buy with this [loan] for 5 or
8 or 10 years."
I find increasingly that the view in the business
community is at odds with what most of us have accepted as a good
[economic] relationship.
I wonder if you could help me through some
of that.
MR. PRELL.
It's a difficult question.
I think many people
in different positions perceive the effects of changes in short-term
rates differently.
A retiree living on the proceeds of short-term
deposits would not see an improvement coming from lower short-term
rates.
A business that has a heavy load of short-term floating rate
debt or debt that rolls over frequently is going to achieve some
significant improvements in the bottom line from the decline in
interest costs.
I think it is fair to say that some of the channels
of positive influence from declining rates have been somewhat
diminished in their effectiveness in the past couple of years because
such sectors as commercial real estate are just so far out of kilter
in terms of the fundamentals of supply and demand that making
borrowing cheaper is not going to make new investments particularly
profitable.
It may enhance property values to some degree and

diminish the write-downs that will occur, but we're not going to get
quite the stimulus we would have in other circumstances.
Similarly,
to the extent that credit availability has been the problem for some
classes
to make

of borrowers, a small reduction in
a very great difference.

rates

probably is not going

But there are a lot of borrowers for whom lower rates will
make a considerable difference.
I think we've seen that the decline
in rates has significantly abetted the balance sheet restructuring
process.
I think lower rates have played a role in sustaining

relatively high valuations in the stock market and probably have
We have not
cushioned the falls in a variety of other asset values.
argued that modest changes in short-term rates are going to make a

10/6/92

night and day difference, but if you feel that there is nothing else
here to provide a great deal of push to the economy over the next few
quarters, our assumption of a decline in long rates looms rather large
as a factor in the projected acceleration. And the question becomes
one of whether some easing of short rates is needed to facilitate that
process.
If people thought that the Fed was overdoing it and that the
implication of the easing was that we would have significantly higher
inflationary pressures down the road and that we wouldn't reverse
course in a timely way, then we might not get the beneficial effects
in the bond market.
My sense is that unless the Fed went to 1 percent
on the funds rate tomorrow--if the movement was gradual--that in the
context of weak economic indicators we are more likely to get the "too
little too late" complaint than we are the notion that we've overdone
it and have shifted to a grossly inflationary posture.
So, there are
a lot of things to weigh here.
But, as we suggested, I don't think we
should ignore the fundamental notion that on balance easing probably
does give us some stimulative effect.
It's a very long answer.
MR. BOEHNE.

Thanks.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On this subject, do we have any evidence
that the marginal propensity to spend out of interest income tends to
rise as interest rates fall on the assumption that the
[unintelligible] part of the standard of living of interest receivers
is fixed?
MR. PRELL.
I'm confident that we don't have any evidence to
support that but no evidence to counter it either.
It's hard enough
to discern a general phenomenon of a lower propensity to spend out of
interest income in general. They refine it to that point.
I don't
know that anyone has even endeavored to do that. By postwar standards
this is rather an extraordinary episode in terms of the dimension of
the decline in interest income, partly because we started the rate
decline early and there's a lag effect here as instruments roll over.
I'm not sure we have a great historical sample from which to try to
discern those [relationships].
MR. JORDAN. As a response on that, I don't think there is
any empirical evidence about the people who already are living on
interest income, but I've been testing the attitudes--this is all
purely anecdotal--of people who are not yet at that stage.
Bankers
tell me that their customers who are looking ahead to retirement have
a threshold in mind of interest income they're going to need. And
what they've been doing is raising the amount of assets they feel they
need in order to achieve their desired interest income as we move to a
lower rate structure.
MR. PRELL. This is the income-to-price effect.
We have the
classic question here about how interest rates will affect consumption
and savings.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are you saying that they're moving out
on the interest rate maturity curve for a higher yield?
MR. JORDAN. No, they're just raising the amount of assets
that they feel they need to set aside.
MR. PRELL.

Their target is trying to get current income.

10/6/92

MR. KELLEY.

I'm sure it's more than they have.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mike, relative to previous forecasts, this
forecast seems to get started a bit later and when we get to the
faster growth it's not quite as strong, at least in 1993, as it was
before. Would you characterize this as an indication of greater
uncertainty on your part as to the strength of the economy, both short
and long term?
MR. PRELL. Well, I suppose we ought to be more uncertain
[given that] we have been disappointed in our prior thinking, but I
don't conceive of it as more uncertain, though it's still very
uncertain. I think the risks are reasonably balanced at this point.
One might argue that we have tipped the scales in a more negative
direction by taking the position we have on productivity, in a sense
making the personal saving rate more directly a function of what is
going on in the labor market.
But I think this forecast is no more
certain in the end than our prior forecast was.
We've been less than
confident for some time now about what was going on.
MR. PARRY. I would ask Ted a question as well.
The import
numbers are really quite strong; I guess that's attributed to
computers.
If one looks at the normal relationship between an economy
exhibiting the characteristics that we currently see, isn't this
really an extraordinary increase in imports given what we see for
[unintelligible]?
MR. TRUMAN.
I think most of the surprises are in the
If you strip out computers and look at nominal
computer area.
imports, our standard equations are not-MR. PARRY.

Doing too well?

MR. TRUMAN.
--doing any worse than they were before, if I
may put it that way.
So, when you take out computers, other imports
have not gone up.
The real surprise has been in computers which seems
to be [a mystery].
First of all, no one has a good model about what
drives computer imports at this stage.
What seems to be going on is
that there are a lot of applications with more power, but they are at
the low end of the technological scale and that's where we are
relatively import intensive. At the higher end of the technological
scale we are export intensive. As a result we have a situation in
which the computer trade balance is reversed.
And even assuming
exports and imports now grow at the same rate, we would have a
widening of that gap.
MR. PARRY. Do people in the industry feel as though this is
going to continue for some period?
MR. TRUMAN. We cooperate with R&S on this, and our sense
from contacts we had after the Greenbook went to print was that the
very rapid rate that we already had in the forecast might
underestimate what is going on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

10/6/92

-11-

MR. LINDSEY.
I'd like to ask Ted and Mike a statistical
question. We know that the things we don't measure well are exports
and imports. Anecdotally, when I was in San Francisco lately, I was
on the Fisherman's Wharf on a Sunday and I heard German, I heard
French, and I heard lots and lots of Japanese. When I'm on an
airplane, I'm one of the few Americans in the first class section.
Howard Banks just wrote a piece saying it was cheaper for a Brit to
spend a long weekend in New York than a long weekend in Paris. We
have all this anecdotal evidence. An expression I heard that sums it
up best is:
"We've become the world's Wal-Mart."
Now, with all these
tourists packing their suitcases full of Gucci and whatever else they
buy on Fifth Avenue, isn't it possible that we are seeing a
miscalculation of the effect of the dollar and that a lot of what
we're picking up as consumption might actually be exports?
MR. TRUMAN. That certainly is possible, though I will make
two comments. One is that over the last decade the Commerce
Department has dramatically improved its collection of data in this
area.
Moreover, we do see a dramatic upward trend in our exports of
services of all kinds.
Now, the question you're asking basically is
whether we're picking up as much of it as we should be.
The answer
may be that the statistical system probably is lagging behind
somewhat. That's one of the reasons why, as I commented at the end
[of my remarks], the services component of exports of goods and
services is growing in the forecast even while the goods side of it is
shrinking.
MR. PRELL. Your question raises an interesting issue about
the consumption behavior that we've observed because consumption has
not been stronger than one might have expected given the usual
determinants.
So, that would suggest it has been running
fundamentally even weaker if this phenomenon is-MR. LINDSEY.
Right. But if our fundamental domestic economy
is weaker than we think but the dollar is having a bigger effect than
we think-MR. TRUMAN. As I said, I think it is unappreciated that, as
opposed to the 1970s, one of the big impacts of the weaker dollar--not
where it has been but where it has gone--has been the income effect as
growth picked up in the rest of the world.
MR. LINDSEY.

Right.

MR. TRUMAN.
Income differentials are less so that foreign
travel, which is generally a luxury good anyhow, is cheaper and easier
for people to do. So, there are two things together:
Coming to see
the Grand Canyon or Fisherman's Wharf or whatever is a big deal and
it's cheaper and easier, and it affects the-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's true that it affects the net export
position and personal consumption expenditures, but it does not affect
the current account.
MR. LINDSEY.

Right.

10/6/92

-12-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It appears in a different line of the
current account and, as far as the total system is concerned, it
clearly doesn't matter.
MR. TRUMAN.

It does affect the GNP, I think.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[It does]
affect the current account balance.
MR. TRUMAN.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. TRUMAN.
services area.
MR. LINDSEY.
suitcases.

affect the GNP, but it doesn't

It is in the services area.

If it's accurately measured, it's in the

Not if they buy the goods that are in their

MR. PARRY. They're not making the distinction of whether
it's a U.S. purchase or a German purchase.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not in that sense; it is put together
with increases in U.S. net exports.
MR. TRUMAN.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We also have the same problem with
direct foreign investment.
If somebody came and dismantled an office
tower in Los Angeles and moved it brick-by-brick abroad, we'd consider
that an export.
MR. KELLEY.
MR. MULLINS.

It's a good idea!
We should probably do that!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Ted, maybe I read too much into your comments,
but you seem to take some comfort in the fact that the dollar is up on
a trade-weighted exchange basis something like 1-1/2 percent over the
intermeeting period and maybe 4-1/2 percent from the lows.
I must say
I don't share that [view].
The reason is that when one looks at how
we've done against the other two principal reserve currencies, the DM
and the yen, [the dollar is] down significantly and at historical
lows.
I'm concerned that in a period of international turmoil we're
really not providing much of an option in terms of a safe haven, and I
think we ought to take note of that.
I don't know what your reaction
to that is.
I would have expected that we would have provided more of
an option and that in fact maybe we were part of the problem rather
than the solution. So, I just don't take that much comfort in looking
at the broad trade-weighted exchange rate.
MR. TRUMAN. I take your point; I actually was trying to have
it both ways, if I may put it that way.
It depends on what question
you're asking. I would separate it into two parts.
One relates to
what has been going on with respect to the yen, where the dollar has
been weaker. But given the size of the Japanese current account

10/6/92

-13-

surplus, it's difficult to imagine that the dollar isn't going to have
to move down against the yen at least in the near term. It is
difficult to believe anything else is right for that particular
problem.
On the European side, the normal historical pattern back in
the 1980s when we had more frequent realignments in the EMS and ERM
was for the dollar basically to be unchanged on average following [the
realignments] because the mark was going up and the franc was going
down.
The market in some sense is simply thinking in terms of
competitiveness.
They had the dollar unchanged.
And the fact that
the dollar has come up on average in the face of all this is something
that should be noted because, among other reasons, in terms of
thinking about the outlook it is a real appreciation and it has a
damping effect.
It comes back to this question of how we live in this
new ERM [era].
They jumped in the canoe and we have for some period
questioned whether they would toss us into the lake.
So, I think it
is not irrelevant that the dollar is down relative to its level at the
time of the last FOMC meeting by 3 or 4 pfennigs against the mark but
up 3 or 4 pfennigs from the low of 138.
So, in that sense we have a
bit to go; there is a cushion there, it seems to me, before we really
are breaking new territory on the part of the European currencies.
I would put the yen on the side.
But, the important point
that you're emphasizing--and I agree with it--is that the markets, as
we saw yesterday, seem to be extraordinarily jittery. One needs to
recognize that fact.
And whether this is the right time to log
another action, which may or may not be fully discounted in the
markets, I think is a question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. On this issue, just a word on the perspective
of the dollar being weak. Some have suggested that it has held its
value pretty well against commodities, but that's not really my area.
MR. ANGELL.

I'm glad to have you contribute your part to

that!
MR. MULLINS. We're running out of candidates for engines to
pull the economy out of this.
One which reappears--you mentioned it
and it is one of the few pluses in the outlook--is the prospect that
the long bond rate might fall another 75 basis points or so as we move
through next year.
Supposing in the post-election period it became
fairly obvious that the prospects of a large fiscal package were quite
high. How would that be reflected in the long bond rate in the
forecast?
MR. PRELL. I guess the simple answer would be that we don't
have that in our forecast. There could be a tradeoff between the
direct effects of lower taxes on income or higher expenditures on
activity that would eliminate the need and probably tend to elevate
long rates relative to what they are in our scenario.

debate

MR. MULLINS.
Indeed, last year during the first-quarter
[on fiscal packages] the long bond went up 60 basis points.

10/6/92

It's an open question, of course, whether
MR. PRELL. Yes.
rates are now higher than they would otherwise be if there were not
already considerable concern about the possibility of some significant
So, it's a little
enhancement in the size of the budget deficit.
[hard] to sort out what the effects would be; but I can envision
circumstances, as you're suggesting, in which the bond markets would
be adversely affected at least temporarily.
Or at least we wouldn't get the 75 basis points
MR. MULLINS.
decline; rates would stay constant.
I can't say that we have a lot of company in this
MR. PRELL.
projection.
There are some other forecasters who are looking for that
kind of rate effect, but it is clearly not what is built into the
There are always uncertainties about
market structure at this point.
liquidity premiums in the term structure, but I don't think it's built
into the market now nor is it necessarily clear that the forecasters
generally are talking about this. But it's interesting, I might note,
that most private forecasters are anticipating flat or maybe even a
slight upward tilt to long rates over the coming year or so.
A growth
forecast of the dimensions we're showing here is also quite [common]
so they're in essence saying that [a decline in long rates] isn't
essential.
We're taking a bit more negative view of what the
underlying strength of demand will be ex any effective fiscal
stimulus, post-election surge in sentiment, or something.
Don't you think the other forecasters will
MR. MULLINS.
catch up in a few weeks once they grind through all the latest data?
MR. PRELL. Possibly; it's hard to say. Even before the
employment report last week, having much the same information as we
had, I sensed more positive expectations than we had. For example, I
attended a meeting of the technical [consultants] of the Business
Council last Tuesday and the prevailing forecast--there was a slight
lag in this, admittedly--was for growth more around 3 percent without
interest rate declines and without a general expectation of
significant fiscal stimulus.
MR. MULLINS.
MR. PRELL.

Three percent for 1993?
For 1993.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FORRESTAL.
question, Mr. Chairman.

President Forrestal.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Ted Truman already answered my

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mike, I'd like to follow up on Ed Boehne's
question. If I understood you correctly, you were saying that within
the context of having provided a fair amount of liquidity for the
readjustment, you are expecting things to improve down the road next
But if the
year and beyond based on where rates have already fallen.
improvement doesn't happen, you suggested toward the end of your
comments that we might have to make substantial reductions in rates to
move the economy along. Having said that, is your discussion about a

10/6/92

-15-

modest reduction now an insurance policy on the rates that have
already come down or did I misunderstand you?
MR. PRELL. Well, I guess it could be viewed that way in the
context of a prevailing expectation now that some small amount of
easing is going to be occurring, which might have a little negative
effect on bond yields if the market were disappointed, all other
things equal.
Basically, as we were putting this forecast together,
my sense was that given the behavior of the Committee what we were
forecasting seemed highly probable and that, unless you switched
gears, some slight further easing would be consistent behavior. We
did not assume anything that we felt was really material to the basic
thrust of the forecast. As we indicated, we are thinking only of a
small fractional further decline in the funds rate as being in the
range that underlies this forecast.
If our story is right, most of
the decline in long rates that we have projected would occur even if
the funds rate were held at 3 percent.
But that's a conjecture.
Basically what I said in my briefing was that we have the expansion
beginning to pick up gradually fairly soon.
If something is wrong in
our analysis, the only logical conclusion we could draw in terms of
policy implications is that more needs to be done if you want to do at
least as well if not better than the forecast. We're falling short of
what the Committee's expectations were for economic activity as it
stands, so that was the conclusion we reached.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mike, returning for just a moment to the
discussion a few minutes ago about how we measure things:
There have
been some comments around here recently about the possibility that our
inflation measurements may in fact be lagging the reality. Could you
comment on that?
MR. PRELL. Well, I don't have anything new to add. As we've
noted in the past, there is possibly some measurement bias toward
higher inflation than in truth is occurring. That probably has
prevailed for some time.
It could conceivably be getting worse, but
that's even harder to judge.
The 1 to 1-1/2 percent inflation that I
held out as a possibility sometime out toward the middle of the decade
could be interpreted in light of the scientific evidence available as
being essentially price stability.
So, if I were at DRI, I would
probably title this a price stability forecast. We are following a
path very much akin to what we've outlined in the past.
Dave Stockton
and his colleagues in briefings to the FOMC have indicated possible
paths to price stability; and inadvertently in terms of what our
forecast have been, we've been on that unemployment path for the last
couple of years and our forecast continues on that path in essence.
We're on a gradual path back toward full employment in this forecast
but it's far enough down the road that we'd be making a lot further
progress on disinflation.
MR. KELLEY.
If we may be meaningfully overstating the
inflation rate, how does that play through to nominal GDP and real
GDP?
MR. PRELL. Well, nothing obvious on nominal GDP--there may
be some tricks of measuring here that would have an effect--but real
GDP presumably is being underestimated. But then so, too, is

-16-

10/6/92

potential GDP in some sense.
The benchmark I think you want to put an
eye on here is capital resource utilization.
The unemployment rate
isn't affected by any of these measurement issues and it has been
trending upward in this recovery. We expect it will be going up
further, so there is room by that measure for the economy to grow
faster; no matter how fast it is growing, it can grow faster than it
has been.
MR. KELLEY. If all these things are happening, where it must
be getting absorbed is in even higher productivity growth rates.
MR. PRELL.
Indeed, and that may go back a considerable ways
into postwar history.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN.
I'd like to go back to long-term interest rates
one more time.
You put a lot of emphasis on their decline.
Is that-I just don't remember--a sharply different view than you've had
before?
MR. PRELL. There is no material change, for example, from
the last forecast to this one in terms of the path for the long-term
rate. Now, I think we've gradually come down over the past several
forecasts.
In 1992 basically long-term rates have followed the path
we charted at the beginning of the year.
It took a lot of short-term
rate decline apparently [Laughter] and that is something that one
might want to consider in terms of the prospects for achieving the
further interest rate decline that we have forecast. Whether we would
be where we are now if we had not had those cuts in short-term rates
is difficult to say.
On the one hand, we wouldn't have had the pull
from those short rates punishing people who don't go out and invest at
the long end.
On the other hand, we probably would have reduced
aggregate demand to some extent and lowered inflation expectations and
tended to lower nominal bond yields.
But we've been saying for some
time that we expect the long rates to come down significantly over the
forecast period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. I want to ask Ted a question. I don't mean to
try to put too fine a point on this, but it's just because I find
today's discussions even more difficult than usual even though they're
often very difficult.
Ted, you mentioned the jitters in the markets.
This links back to what Bill McDonough was talking about before. Do
you see a difference in the jitters in the markets given their
expectations of what we're going to do one way or the other?
In other
words, are the markets likely to become more or less jittery whether
we act or don't act or is it pretty much center-weighted?
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. SYRON.

That's a very difficult question.
It's a very difficult situation.

MR. TRUMAN.
I think that's right.
In some sense this is the
position we were in at the beginning of September when we had the bad
employment report.
Do you disrupt the market more by disappointing it
relative to its expectations or do you disrupt it more by giving it

10/6/92

-17-

what it expects, assuming we have [assessed] the expectations right?
We can guess, but our guess is not perfect.
I'd just add one point
from a rest-of-the-world perspective.
It's one thing if we were just
running our own situation.
But one of the problems, which makes this
a little different, is the uncertainty that has been generated by the
European situation and the fact that that has not played itself out in
all its political as well as economic dimensions.
That does seem to
me to add one small note of caution.
I don't think it is decisive,
but to the extent that Federal Reserve easing at this point
disappoints Mr. Sapin again, he may have to cut off a few more heads
[unintelligible] go forward. But I think that goes with the
territory. That would be basically my response, but it is a
possibility.
MR. PRELL. May I correct something I said?
While the
interest rate decline going out to 1994 is essentially the same amount
as before, in light of the weaker economy over the next few quarters
we've moved that decline up in time somewhat.
More of it occurs
quickly. So, on this forecast we have somewhere between 1/4 to 1/2
point more decline by next spring than before; then the rate flattens
out more as the economy picks up.
MR. MCDONOUGH.
If I could pick up on Ted's comment for just
a moment:
I think we have to recognize that the situation in Europe
is still very unstable.
So, something could happen in Europe whether
we lower the fed funds rate here or don't lower the fed funds rate; it
could have very little to do with what we do or don't do.
But
establishing that causality necessarily would be very difficult. I
come to the conclusion that the foreign market does not inhibit the
Committee from doing what it otherwise wishes to do.
MR. SYRON.

That's precisely the answer.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Well, speaking of what might or might not
inhibit our activity, we've had several references this morning to the
fact that expectations of further ease already seem to be built into
both interest rates and foreign exchange rates.
Yet we're within a
month of the election and I thought it was conventional wisdom that we
weren't expected to act so close to an election. But I never see any
references to that anymore.
Whatever happened to that?
MR. PRELL.
I've seen a few, but I think the more predominant
notion is that the recent weakness in economic indicators just seems
to make a compelling case in light of the past patterns of behavior of
the Committee.
MR. BOEHNE.
It also isn't true.
There are numerous examples
of this Committee tightening within a month of an election, not just
easing.
MR. SYRON.

And given lags.

MR. MCTEER. Well, tightening doesn't affect our credibility
the same way that easing might.
We're usually accused of doing things
to help the incumbent, I believe.

10/6/92

-18-

MS. PHILLIPS.

But it's a long lag.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
these two gentlemen?

Any further questions for either of

MR. JORDAN.
I have a couple of questions for Mike involving
quotes from the Greenbook.
Some of this may already have been covered
in the questions and responses but I'm still looking.
I have two
different questions, really. One is about the linkages, the model
that you use in assessing the effects of policy on the outlook.
That's still not clear to me.
On page 23 in Section I of the
Greenbook it says at the bottom of the first paragraph:
"The rise in
short-term rates in 1994 is assumed necessary to prevent aggregate
demand from gaining so much momentum that noninflationary levels of
resource utilization are subsequently exceeded."
There's a gap in
there but also an implied linkage from nominal interest rates to GNP,
I suppose; you've already responded a little to that in your answer to
Tom's question. Then the Greenbook says:
"Long-term rates are
expected to edge down further as expectations of inflation continue to
recede."
So, the long-term expected rate of inflation is somehow
influenced by observed actual inflation. Now, all of this taken
together implies that real short-term interest rates are rising even
if nominal rates are not.
But you're saying that the rise in real
short-term rates is not sufficient in your framework to keep the
economy on a noninflationary path and so you need an increase in
nominal rates as well as real rates since obviously inflationary
expectations are coming down and real rates are rising.
MR. PRELL. We in essence have the real short-term rate
moving back toward what might be regarded as more the equilibrium
level in the longer run as we use up some of the slack in the economy
to insure that aggregate demand doesn't overshoot a disinflation path.
Our assumption is that we have reached further in the direction of
relatively low real short-term rates, below what would be sustainable
in the long haul.
We have it coming back up some.
Another factor in
this is that we are getting some extra retardation in a sense in the
financial sphere now from the credit crunch and other experiences in
the financial system. As those ease, some adjustment in the nominal
market and real market rates would be called for in order to exert
adequate restraint on aggregate demand.
MR. JORDAN.
Meaning further increases in real rates; the
natural increase is not enough and you need further increases in real
rates in your framework. But it also depends on a linkage between
nominal interest rates and nominal spending.
MR. PRELL. Well, we're thinking of this more in terms of a
link from real interest rates to spending decisions. And there's a
whole dynamic here of activity and resource utilization and inflation;
the inflation results do affect expectations about future inflation.
That gets built into the bond yields and so on.
MR. JORDAN. Well, I know you have said that in your
presentations from previous months and in the arguments I have
listened to about inflation expectations, the inflation [component] in
the long rates, and what's coming down based on experience.
But when
I talk to business leaders and people in small and large businesses
regarding their inflation forecasts, or look at the Michigan Survey or

10/6/92

-19-

[that of the National Association of] Business Economists they have
this persistent 4 to 5 percent inflation range or higher.
No one
mentions the gap between current [and potential] output or the
unemployment rate.
If they mention anything at all, they mention the
budget deficit or they say:
"I don't know, but that's what always
happens--inflation goes up."
But you are in effect saying that
inflation expectations are going to come down, bringing long-term
interest rates down in spite of these perceptions, [and] that
eventually experience with lower prices grudgingly will dominate their
view about [the effects of] fiscal impulses on inflation.
MR. PRELL. But I think it's not a sustainable relationship
here to have inflation running at 2 or 3 percent and inflation
expectations remaining at 4 or 5 percent.
Something has to give:
Either those inflation expectations will prove such a serious
impediment to lower wage agreements and provide some momentum
somewhere in the price system that we won't get the disinflation we
have [forecast] or, as experience builds that the norm is not the 5 or
6 percent inflation we've experienced over the last two decades but 3
percent or 2 percent, there's going to be an adjustment.
The
experience to date suggests that the brute force effect of slack in
the system has been able to overcome any stickiness in this inflation
expectation that's evident in the consumer surveys or even many
professional economists forecasts.
Indeed, we pointed out over the
past year that it didn't appear that the private economists were
generally expecting inflation to come down further in the latter part
of this year or 1993.
I've seen a shift in that.
I think there is
more movement in our direction. We're still a bit ahead of the
average in our expectation about the disinflation progress, but there
is a change.
Some of you have noted that businessmen increasingly are
thinking that they are going to have to do their planning in a pricing
environment that is going to be more consistent with lower inflation.
MR. JORDAN.
But in this transition until the expectations of
private decisionmakers come into line with where we think policies are
taking inflation, we do have these very substantial transition costs
on the economy. Does all of this suggest that you're not relying on
any version of the P* model anymore in forming your inflation outlook?
MR. PRELL. Well, I will confess that we never did, [at
least] on the straight P* form--though there are elements of the P*
model that are very much consistent with our models. That is, the
output gap there is the critical lever in lowering inflation, and that
is equivalent to the aggregate model we're using. Obviously, the
money growth numbers don't argue against our forecast; they argue for
an even more rapid deceleration of prices.
And if you believe that
money is behaving in a normal way, then I guess you'd want to argue
that we grossly [over]stated where the inflation rate is going to be
in 1993-94.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions? If not, who
would like to start the Committee's discussion?
Bob Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic weakness persists in most
of the Twelfth District and it may have intensified since our last
meeting. District-wide employment fell in August at a 4.6 percent
annual rate, led by weakness in construction and manufacturing.
Job
losses have been most severe in California, where employment fell at a

10/6/92

6.2 percent annual rate in August and at a 2.1 percent rate in
September, bringing employment in the state of California to a new
cyclical low.
Other District states also are beginning to show some
signs of weakness.
Previously robust growth in Idaho and Utah has
[waned], with employment declining on balance since February.
Cutbacks in aerospace production are affecting Washington, and the
lumber and wood products business is contracting in Oregon in large
part due to environmental restrictions.
Both business contacts and
statistical indicators of District activity give little evidence of
The outlook for California is of particular
renewed economic growth.
concern. Already announced cutbacks in aerospace, defense, and state
and local government, together with an overhang in commercial real
estate, suggest weakness could persist well into 1993.
Turning to the national economy, our forecast is quite
similar to that of the Greenbook. I would characterize our forecast
as one in which the pickup in the economy, instead of being just
around the corner, appears to be just around the corner and well down
the block. In addition, once economic activity gets to that point it
doesn't seem to be quite as robust as we had it before. That
development produces greater uncertainty at least on my part.
That
combined with what appear to be better inflation rates in the offing
suggests that a policy move at this time would be appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
There seems to be little disagreement in the
views that I expect to hear as the go-around continues and the staff
forecast.
It does not seem to me likely that the economy is going to
be substantially stronger than the forecast.
Since I anticipate so
much agreement in regard to the current state of the economy, it seems
to me it would be well for us to continue the earlier discussion,
which involved assessing how well monetary policy is working to
accomplish any impact upon the real economy. Now, I for one have more
confidence, I think, in Mike Prell's forecast than maybe he does.
MR. PRELL.

You might think about whether it makes sense!

MR. ANGELL. My confidence is based upon the fact that he has
produced consistently biased errors in one direction over the last
three years. That seems to me entirely likely if you have someone who
has some motive other than getting the forecast right or if the model
is defective. And it seems to me it's time for us to examine more
carefully the model that produced such biased errors.
Let me go back
to the Humphrey-Hawkins period and the July FOMC meeting:
I think the
pickup in M2 growth in August and September to a very slight 3 percent
rate was due more to the declines in intermediate rates, which were
almost unprecedented, following the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony in
July. We had dramatic declines in two-year, three-year, five-year,
seven-year, and ten-year Treasury rates, and that seems to me to
account for the rise in M2.
Now, I would hold that lower fed funds
rates under some conditions may well reduce aggregate demand and that
under some conditions lowering the fed funds rate may very well cause
intermediate rates to rise.
Under those circumstances it seems to me
that M2 will grow more slowly rather than more rapidly and we will
then end up with unintended consequences.

10/6/92

-21-

But to me the most important point is not necessarily to look
at the [transmission] mechanism through the fed funds rate on M2 but
to look at it in terms of its impact upon household balance sheets and
on household income statements.
I believe it's time for us to devote
a great deal of attention to the question of the duration of household
assets and the duration of household liabilities.
If households have
taken [on] a huge interest rate debt and if the duration of household
assets were conditioned by a period of rising interest rates or an
expectation that interest rates would rise again and if households
then are holding very short duration assets, under those conditions a
fall in the fed funds rate is going to result in a substantial
reduction in household income.
Now, I do not know what the duration
of household assets might be by looking at their flow-of-funds.
I
don't know whether anyone knows what that duration might be.
What I'm
suggesting is that there may be some conditions under which lowering
the fed funds rate is not going to work the way we'd anticipate.
Since we have watched the fed funds rate come down from 9.90 percent
to 3 percent--that's 690 basis points--and it has had less than the
intended effect upon credit and upon spending, then it seems very
appropriate for us to look again at this model.
Now I'm going to live a little dangerously:
I think I
disagree with Bill McDonough's comment that the foreign exchange
market does not in a sense have an implication for our domestic
monetary decisions.
I would agree that a reserve currency country
does not take its cues from trying to follow somebody else's exchange
rate.
But it seems to me that the dramatic fall in intermediate
interest rates in July and August put the spot foreign exchange value
of the dollar on a downward course, unless the implied forward rate of
the dollar were rising faster than those rates were falling.
So, we
have to ask ourselves then:
What will happen if we reduce the fed
funds rate at a time when the foreign exchange value of the dollar may
be at a precarious point?
It seems to me that making a fed funds rate
move might very well feed into a weaker dollar.
I think all of us
must understand that we have a very exploding global money market
condition; we have almost pure competition in this market--not perfect
because information is catching up--but it's exploding also.
So, with
this very perfected money market that is global, we have to look at
the feedback loops that possibly exist between the fed funds rate and
its impact upon the weaker dollar and its subsequent impact, which
could very well cause intermediate rates to rise.
Indeed, if the
implied forward exchange rate is to remain constant, then under those
circumstances lowering the fed funds rate [and] lowering the two-year
Treasury rate, has to raise the implied forward rate at years 9 and
10; otherwise we're going to be out of adjustment on the forward
rates.
So., I believe we're in a precarious place here. One of the
good things we have going for us in an economy that needs growth is
that the U.S. equity market has not yet taken a tumble. But I think
most are very leery concerning where we are here.
My assessment, then, of our current economic condition is
that it is a global-money capital-market-driven relationship. We have
gone a long way. And I am not optimistic about the impact of lowering
the fed funds rate at this point in time in terms of stimulating
economic growth.
Now, if we are willing to make our fed funds rate
moves based upon price level targeting and if everyone knows that's
the basis upon which we're making our moves, then it seems to me that
under those circumstances we could very well expect in the future that

-22-

10/6/92

So, I'm
lower fed funds rates will provide us more bang for the buck.
in a mode of saying that there may be lower fed funds rates out there
that will be helpful in the future if we are on the path that Mike
Prell has suggested toward price level stability.
But the question
for us is:
How do we get the most bang for the buck?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. The latest national reports--especially that of
the National Association of Purchasing Managers, the employment
figures, and the downturn in consumer expectations--have been very
In light of those reports, I think
disheartening to say the least.
the staff was correct in lowering its projection; what they've done
But I don't think anybody really
seems pretty reasonable to me.
understands why we are getting this persistent weakness in the
economy.
In such a case it looks to me as if the risks of error on
any kind of forecast are very high indeed.
I would be more hesitant
to guess which way the risks of error might lie in this particular
period of time.
I do take a small measure of comfort in the most recent
information we have gotten from around our District.
The economic
picture may not be as bleak as suggested by the national data; some of
the District
information is
[more current].
For example, reports of
our directors at the September meeting certainly did nothing to
suggest that there would be any further decline in business activity
in their view in our District.
The same is true of the reports that
we got in our regular survey of manufacturers and retailers.
In fact,
that survey actually suggested a slight improvement in a number of
areas such as retail sales, manufacturing, business sentiment, and
residential real estate. And I think the recent growth in bank credit
and money also presents at least a ray of hope about the future.
Indications that loans are now more available, as reported in the
Greenbook, are pretty well consistent with what we are hearing in our
District through anecdotal information. While the 3 percent rate of
growth in M2 in August and September is lower than I would like to see
at this
point, it's
a big improvement over the negative rates of
I hope this could be
growth that we had for the previous five months.
the beginning of some sustained period of higher growth.
Insofar as the inflation forecast is concerned, as you know,
the Greenbook is showing a decline in the CPI down to a rate of about
2 percent by the end of 1994.
That seems reasonable to me, given the
sharp deceleration in money growth that we've had over the last
several years.
If we were to achieve this low inflation rate,
however, then I think we have to be prepared if necessary to let the
federal funds rate rise rather quickly when economic activity and the
rate of growth of money do speed up, although I hope what Governor
I'll return
Angell described is really what will happen in that case.
to this point later when we get to the policy discussion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the District have not
While the trends are
changed that much since the last meeting.
somewhat mixed, I think on balance the overall rate of economic
activity has moderated; and certainly attitudes have deteriorated
further.
The auto industry and all auto-related activities are

10/6/92

-23-

weaker. Third-quarter sales were lower than the industry's earlier
expectations and the sales forecasts for the fourth quarter have
As
already been reduced and, I think, still may be on the high side.
a result, fourth-quarter production plans are steadily being reduced.
At one point, the fourth-quarter schedules were significantly higher
than last year--though last year was a weak comparative period--but by
now they have been scaled back and are only about 4 percent over last
Again, I think the production risk is on the down side.
year's level.
Farm equipment sales and manufacturing continue to
deteriorate. The sales of major [farm equipment] units for the year
through August are off 18 percent from last year and off 24 percent
One major manufacturer has reduced its fourthfrom two years ago.
quarter production schedule again and is now planning fourth-quarter
Other parts of the
production that is 21 percent below last year.
manufacturing sector in the District, however, continue to expand but,
again, the growth rate has moderated. Orders for Class 8 trucks, the
But in the last 30
big trucks, are running some 25 percent over 1991.
days there has been a perceptible change in the attitude of major
truck customers, and the manufacturers are now concerned that this
[orders trend] might turn around quite quickly. Therefore, their
confidence regarding the rest of this year, but more importantly for
1993, is not very strong. Medium truck sales, Class 6 and Class 7,
Offsetting
are about level with 1991 and no improvement is expected.
this, though, housing activity in the District continues to show
strength.
New single-family home sales in the Midwest rose 15 percent
in July and continued to climb in August.
Home starts also were
strong and that strength is carrying through to the manufacturers of
In the retail area, sales continue to run about 6
building materials.
Customers, however, as I've
to 8 percent ahead of last year.
And retailers who
commented before, are very, very price conscious.
import a good deal of their merchandise are continuing to have to
Finally, in the
raise prices to reflect the plunge in the dollar.
agricultural sector, I think crop production is going to bring very
We're clearly going to have good crops--indeed, perhaps
good news.
Prices are way down, but
bumper crops--in both corn and soybeans.
we're going to have very good production.
In the inflation area--price pressures--the news continues to
improve.
Intense competitive conditions are continuing to restrain
price increases and many manufacturers are holding the increased cost
In the case of a
of their purchases to very, very minimum levels.
couple of large manufacturers, they have actually been able to
accomplish reductions in their purchase prices on a year-over-year
basis.
But at this point inflation is just not an issue, certainly
among the people I talk with, and they are growingly disturbed that
In
they just can't get price increases to stick in the marketplace.
turn, they have worked [to hold down] their purchase prices, as I
suggested. In the labor area, contracts continue to be settled on
what I think are very favorable terms.
In a national context, I find the overall economic outlook
[The economy has remained] a long time in
increasingly worrisome.
this very steady state--I think perhaps too long--and there is a real
risk at this point that [the expansion] will lose momentum. We
continue to reduce our growth forecast and are now down to a point
that the sustainability of even the current very moderate rate has to
be open to question. In this environment, despite the policy easing

10/6/92

-24-

moves that we have made, the risk of the economy taking off at such a
rapid rate as to cause strong inflationary pressures seems pretty
close to zero.
But I think the risk that the economy could fall back
into negative growth is very real and is increasing with the passage
of time.
Therefore, in a monetary policy context, I think we ought to
move again as early as we have the opportunity to do so.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, leaving aside the effects of
Hurricane Andrew, conditions in the Sixth District appear to have
stabilized in the last six weeks or so.
That, of course, represents a
change in our situation because, as you remember, I've been reporting
for some time that we've had considerable deterioration in economic
activity in the first half of the year, particularly on the employment
side.
I hasten to add that the improvements that we're seeing are
very marginal in nature, although I would say that the outlook does
seem a little better because the imbalances in our local economy are
not quite as evident as they were at the beginning of the year.
Looking at some particular sectors, residential real estate
is expanding modestly and we're getting reports from realtors in
several cities that they experienced higher sales of single-family
houses in September.
Rents appear to be firming in the District,
although multifamily and commercial building rents are flat.
Construction of industrial facilities is rising, basically because,
interestingly, the vacancy rate in the industrial sector in our city
is below that of the national market. We recently completed a survey
of manufacturing plants and that survey shows some improvement in
August, with more respondents reporting gains in production as well as
in shipments compared to July and compared to a year earlier.
On the
other hand, the survey does show some softness in capital spending and
expenditures; they are going to be confined apparently to productivity
enhancements as opposed to plant expansion or expenditures on
equipment.
Our unemployment rate continues to be above the national
average.
In terms of individual states, Florida has been hit pretty
hard, of course, not only by the hurricane but by defense cutbacks and
very slow in-migration.
Louisiana and Mississippi are being impacted
adversely by weakness in the energy sector.
Despite this poor
employment situation, retail sales have increased modestly but I guess
the [operative] word there is "modestly."
We, too, Governor Lindsey,
are seeing sharp increases in the number of foreign visitors to the
District; that has been going on for some time but has accelerated
with the weakness in the dollar. However, the recent hurricane in
Florida has caused tourism to be off there not only in the impacted
area but throughout the state as well.
We see bookings off, for
example, in Orlando where the hurricane didn't hit. As we noted in
our special report on the hurricane, the District will at least
temporarily be a beneficiary of the hurricane in the near term because
of the concentration of industries throughout the District that are
related to housing and construction. Finally, we see no inflationary
pressures and no price pressures at all in the District.
Looking at the national economy, like the Board staff, we've
lowered our forecast of real GDP over the balance of this year and
into 1993, although perhaps not by quite as much as the Board staff.
On inflation we're pretty much the same in the near term. So,
basically we're comfortable with the staff's forecast, although I

10/6/92

-25-

don't feel very comfortable about any forecast these days and haven't
for some time.
It's difficult for me to see sources of improvement in
the economy anywhere in the near term. The outlook for growth abroad
has deteriorated steadily and certainly it's not being helped by the
volatility in the foreign exchange markets and the recessionary trends
in the economies of many of our trading partners.
Of course, as we
have talked about several times, we are seeing the restructuring of
balance sheets both on the part of households and corporations, but it
seems to me we have a long way to go.
A continuation of that process
is going to temper spending for some time longer, I think.
From
people that I talk with and from what I'm observing in the press,
people are very concerned and very pessimistic about the state of the
federal budget deficit.
I think they are expecting tax increases to
deal with that situation and that, too, is going to crimp incomes in
the 1990s and beyond and certainly crimp spending. When I put all of
that together, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the risk is very much
on the down side; and we need to take that into account as we deal
with monetary policy.
While I have the floor, if I could go back to the hurricane
for just a minute--though this is really a non-FOMC matter--I'd just
very quickly like to say what I've already written to most if not all
of you:
The people in Miami and certainly we in the District
appreciate tremendously the wonderful outpouring of support of all
kinds that came from around the Federal Reserve System. If ever the
family spirit of the System was evident, it certainly was in this
period.
So, we thank you very much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Conditions in the Philadelphia District are
mixed, but on the whole I think they've deteriorated some in recent
weeks. The major source of that deterioration has been in
manufacturing.
Manufacturing was a source of some uplift to the
District economy in the first part of the year, but in the last couple
of months manufacturing activity has slowed and I think it has now
become negative.
Despite continuing employment declines, which have
been sharper than for the nation as a whole, particularly in New
Jersey, retail sales have held up fairly well.
They are not great but
they are probably running a little over a year ago.
In the
construction area, I have nothing to add; nonresidential construction
continues to decline and [sentiment] is very sour. There is some
improvement in residential construction.
One of the additional changes, besides what is happening in
manufacturing, is that while I would have summarized the condition of
our banks until fairly recently as marginally bottoming out with some
hints of improvement, I wouldn't be comfortable saying that now. I
think more of our banks are deteriorating than improving. If we probe
the bankers on that, we hear a number of reasons.
For one, they say
that a number of small and medium-size businesses that had held on
through this period of slow growth are running out of string and are
just dying.
That is showing up in loan delinquencies and loan
defaults.
Some of the banks are able to cover [the resulting losses]
because of their spreads; and they've lowered their other costs.
But
the deterioration is clearly showing up, and I think we're in for a
period of some additional deterioration.

10/6/92

Attitudes, I think, are worse than the underlying conditions.
The Mason-Dixon line makes a big difference! Our September meeting
was about as pessimistic in terms of director attitudes as I have
seen, reflecting this cumulation of slowness and not much prospect of
getting better.
As with other Districts, inflation outside the health
care industry and the regulated industries is largely a non-issue.
It
is just hard to make price increases stick.
As far as the national economy goes, its growth is basically
stagnating.
I think we have about as much chance of getting some
modest declines in growth as we have of modest increases.
There just
are no sustainable drivers. The employment-income-consumption dynamic
is missing and it's very hard to see where we're going to get the
thrust.
Despite that, I have found this current period more difficult
I believe any of us sitting
in thinking through monetary policy.
around the table, if we're at all objective, could come up with some
good reasons to ease and some good reasons to stay where we are.
I
come down on the side that some good would come from some additional
easing. So, I'm in the camp that thinks we ought to ease monetary
policy--not that I think it will do great things but because I think
at the margin it will be positive.
Also, it's important that the Fed
as an institution be viewed as doing whatever we reasonably can to
help the economy get out of the swamp.
Some additional easing in
monetary policy would fall into the column of something we can do that
is reasonable and I don't see a lot of downside risks in that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

I'm sorry, President

Syron.
MR. SYRON.

I'll cede.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

There's nothing to cede;

it's just my

mistake.
MR. SYRON.
I don't know if there's anything dramatically new
in our District. What may be not dramatically new, consistent with
what other people have said, is that there is a deepening disillusion
and fear being reflected in consumption and other things.
It's not
panic, but fear is the word that unfortunately is [applicable] I
think; I suppose [it reflects] regional problems; considering our
employment is down 10-1/2 percent from the peak, that's not greatly
surprising. Manufacturing over the period since the last FOMC has
turned somewhat more sluggish. That's tied largely to the aircraft
and the auto industries and to the problems we have that are endemic
Retailing
to the local computer industry and their competitive niche.
is mixed. Value price retailers report some strength on mixed sales.
Actually, an interesting phenomenon is that they're reporting a
willingness to hold inventories longer, given the reduced costs to
carry. But upscale retailers are reporting that sales are pretty
poor. Auto sales are soft and that has gone on since the last period.
The one sign of strength that we have seen is in the housing area for
first-time home buyers--low-price houses are being built--but there
Prices
has been a slowdown again in [sales of] upper price houses.
are very well behaved.
We hear these stories about plywood prices-I'm sure everyone does-- and the pickup trucks heading down Route 495.
As far as the U.S. economy goes, I find myself as usual in
broad agreement with the Greenbook forecast. I'd quibble slightly

10/6/92

-27-

Given the employment information we have,
with some elements of it.
for the output that is in the Greenbook I think we might have an even
slightly higher unemployment rate. But I do believe the forecast
itself is internally consistent. There are risks, obviously.
We've
been on the low growth path for quite a long period of time; and we
don't know what shocks or episodes could come along and knock us off
We see some of that potentially
this path from one side to the other.
happening and then reversing itself in the stock market. Also, I
personally believe that there's a lot to this headwind argument--that
this is a rebalancing of people's internal balance sheets. But it's
very hard, even though we see improvement, to know what the new
optimal balance sheet is that individuals and even corporations have
in mind, given that many of them have been through a quite frightening
period.
At the end of the day, what this comes down to for me is
that while many of us usually say we generally agree with the
Greenbook and could be fairly comfortable with the outcome in the
Greenbook, I have to say that I'm pretty uncomfortable with the
outcome in this Greenbook. Looking at the third quarter next year, we
still have an unemployment rate--and, as I say, mine would be slightly
higher--that is hovering just below 8 percent and we haven't gone
I think in its broadest terms this is
through 3 percent [GDP] growth.
just not going to be an acceptable outcome. Unfortunately, again
repeating what other people have said, I just don't see the engines
that are going to bring us away from this.
So, I think we're in a
very, very difficult position. I'm sure--"sure" may be a little
strong--that we will see some sort of fiscal package regardless of who
I don't think that's something that we should be
wins [the election].
weighing in our calculations, so we're in a very delicate position.
The
My sympathy, like Ed Boehne's, lies with doing something more.
only thing that would dissuade me in that sympathy is a strong
argument that the credibility of the organization would be hurt by our
I personally have a lot of
doing something close to an election.
skepticism about that argument because we're so close now and the lags
are [long], but it's something I think we should discuss a little in
the general monetary policy discussion. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. In the District there has been a discernable but
I would say small improvement in activity since the last meeting.
Consumer spending has improved a bit; residential construction and
sales of residential units have picked up; forest products seem for
the most part to be doing reasonably well, getting a little additional
It has been a good year for tourism both
kick from the hurricane.
And unemployment rates in the
from domestic and foreign tourists.
District have continued for the most part to be well below the
Agriculture is mixed, depending on the weather.
national average.
Perhaps the only real sign of weakness is in mining where some recent
layoffs have occurred up on the iron range in northern Minnesota.
Despite this further improvement, I'd say attitudes remain uniformly
cautious.
I wouldn't describe them as particularly discouraged, but
people are cautious. I don't think anybody is expecting a sharp
change for the better in economic activity.
I came across the same sort of concern about interest rates
that Ed Boehne expressed earlier. There does seem to be a view that

10/6/92

interest rates are going to go back up, perhaps significantly, at some
point in the not too distant future. I don't think it's tied to any
expectations one way or the other about changes in monetary policy. I
don't think it's tied, at least not very directly, to expectations
about an acceleration of inflation. It may in some instances be tied
to people's assessment of the budget. But it's mostly that people, in
their business experience, view rates as unusually low today and they
don't believe that these rates are going to be sustained. The
analysis essentially stops there.
It's basically a judgment about
what is typical.
With regard to the national economy, we are all emphasizing
the very weak and disappointing statistics that we've received over
the last month or six weeks.
That is reflected in the forecast and I
think that's fully understandable. On the other hand, if you go
beyond the latest statistics--and, of course, we can't do anything
about them--and look at the financial variables, if anything they look
a little better. M2 growth has moved back into the positive range.
Bank credit and business loans at commercial banks seem to have picked
up a bit and we hear some anecdotes about greater availability and
more aggressive searching for customers on the part of bankers and
others.
If we look at bank reserves or narrow money, we see very
rapid growth, and I would say that this is something we need to keep
an eye on as we go forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. At the last meeting I reported that our picture,
which had been generally positive on the employment front, had
weakened a bit.
That would be the case in the most recent period as
well. We have modest declines in employment, more in manufacturing
than nonmanufacturing. Earlier on, gains in nonmanufacturing were
really offsetting the weakness in manufacturing. Notwithstanding
those numbers, I have not detected any significant change in attitudes
among directors and other people I talk with. Last week I was in two
areas of our District that probably have never seen a recession, as a
matter of fact.
Many businessmen I talked to--these tend to be small
and medium-sized businessmen--are reporting record years and yet they
just feel lousy. Their complaints run to things like regulation,
clean air, ABA, and things like that and the impact those things are
having on them. There's a great deal of uncertainty or lack of
confidence--I don't know how to describe it.
It's just a not good
feeling about where we're going or a lack of knowledge or confidence
about where we're going. And that, I think, is really affecting
people.
I picked up the same thing we've heard from Ed and Gary:
Very seldom does anybody say that additional interest rate cuts are
going to help; in fact they say quite the opposite.
On the banking side in the Eighth District, as I've commented
from time-to-time, our numbers still are looking very good. We are
outperforming our peers. We tend to look at banks of less than $15
billion and I guess the most significant point is that nonperforming
loans are lower--about 1-1/2 percent versus almost 3 percent in the
peer group--and charge-offs are half that of the peer group, maybe 1/2
of 1 percent versus 1 percent.
I think that's the principal thing
So, all during this period I've perceived our
affecting results.
banks to be in a position to extend credit and I've felt that demand
We've seen modest growth in loan
has been the problem, not supply.

-29-

10/6/92

demand over the last year and that has continued in the most recent
period. The most significant point is that it's across the board this
time around. We've all read articles recently about the increase in
[banks'] securities portfolios.
Over the last year those have grown
about 18 percent in our District but in the most recent quarter only 2
percent.
So, I sense that what is going on--and I don't know whether
it is a harbinger of things to come more broadly--is that with a
healthy banking sector we are beginning to see a little more loan
demand, which is being reflected not only in the loan growth but in
much slower growth in holdings of investment securities.
Probably, in
terms of the aggregates, as demand picks up that will get reflected in
M2.
As you all know, the non-M1 components are really very weak-negative--and all the growth we're getting in M2 is from very rapid Ml
growth.
Commenting nationally, the one concern I have about Mike's
forecast is the longer-run inflation outlook.
I hope he's right.
I
have no quibbles with what inflation is likely to be next year and
maybe well into 1994, but the lags here are very long. And one of the
things I've commented on from time-to-time is this trend growth in Ml,
which is a 3-year moving average.
I don't think we can make shortterm policy decisions based on the short-term behavior of Ml; but over
longer periods of time it gives us some information on what the thrust
of policy has been.
From, say, late '86 or early '87 we had brought
that trend growth down from 11 percent to roughly 3 percent.
In early
1990 it moved up in a relatively short period of time to over 7
percent and, of course, M1 is growing at about 15 percent now. Again,
I don't know that it has any relevance for decisions we'll be making
today but longer term I worry about whether or not we're trading away
some of that basis for lower inflation that we had created several
years ago and that we're reaping the benefits of now.
Just a couple of other comments, quickly. One has to do with
market expectations and whether we should gratify them or not because
they're there or whether that gives us room to move.
I think we have
to recognize that when this party comes to an end, whenever that is,
it's going to be disruptive. In other words, we've had a long period
of declining interest rates and human nature, being what it is, is
going to anticipate more. That's just the way behavior in markets
tends to work over time. So, whenever the time comes for us to say
"that's it," it's going to be difficult.
I don't think that will ever
be easy. The other general observation I would make is that I'm more
sensitive about the risks in foreign exchange markets, [along the
lines of] Governor Angell's comments, than what I've heard in general
around the table.
I just feel that that's a process; we learned this
in the mid '80s. Monetary policy was very stimulative for a long
period of time and the chickens really didn't come home to roost in
the foreign exchange markets until '87 as a result of actions that
were taken in '85 and '86.
I think we all know from that experience
that once they do, it's awfully hard to get them under control again.
While it's easy to say that another 25 basis points may not engender
any kind of crisis, if it ever did we would have one big problem on
our hands.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. We haven't detected much difference in the
Eleventh District economy from the last time I reported. We still

10/6/92

have a positive but very flat growth trend.
I believe it would put us
in the top half of the Districts, though, or maybe even in the top
third. Employment is still growing, largely because of government
employment growth. Private sector employment growth is essentially
flat; the employment growth we get is in fits and starts.
The weakest
sectors of the economy are energy and durable goods manufacturing.
Residential construction has flattened a bit in recent months as well.
The strong part of the economy, of course, is along the Mexican
border, especially in retail sales. Governor Lindsey mentioned that
this country may be in the process of becoming the world's Wal-Mart;
ironically enough, that may apply to the Third World as well as the
rest of the world.
I learned this past week that McAllen, Texas,
along the border, supposedly has the two most profitable Wal-Mart
stores in the country.
It has a mall with reportedly the highest
sales per square foot of any mall in the United States. All along the
So, we are doing
border retail sales are higher than personal income.
a lot of retailing to the Mexican customer there.
Symbolically,
although it's of no relevance to monetary policy, we just gained the
They are moving
headquarters of Southwestern Bell from St. Louis.
their headquarters to San Antonio. One of the main reasons they gave
for that move was to be closer to Mexico because of a joint venture
they have going with the Mexican telephone company.
I've been engaged in a series of eight meetings with bankers
around the District to talk about various issues and see what is on
It was scheduled
Tomorrow will be the eighth of those.
their minds.
for a room in a hotel in San Antonio. We're being bumped from our
room so that Presidents Bush and Salinas and Mr. Mulroney can sign the
NAFTA agreement; we're going to be pushed down the hall from that
little exercise. The mood of the bankers is very negative; they're
focused almost exclusively on the regulatory burden and what is coming
at them with this new FDICIA legislation. When you talk about a
credit crunch with them, they associate that with supply constraints
and they deny that there is any credit crunch when they [look at] it
that way. They attribute the flatness in lending almost exclusively
to weak demand for quality loans. On the other hand, in other
conversations with them when we are talking about the regulatory
burden, they seem to be saying that lending is flat in part because it
has become much riskier to lend and a lot easier, and just as
So,
profitable these days, to invest in government securities.
lending is still very flat in the Eleventh District after all this
time of healing. I guess the lesson from that is that even after
measures of bank health improve, and have been improving for a long
time, it's still a long time before that results in additional
lending. Most measures of health in banking in the Eleventh District
have been improving for quite some time and now stand significantly
If you look at the bank loan
above those in the rest of the country.
situation from the point of view of potential borrowers rather than
from bankers, up until a few months ago they did believe that the
credit crunch was more than weak quality-loan demand; they believed it
But there have been reports
was supply constraints from the banks.
now for two or three months that that is changing. They are reporting
that bankers are out there soliciting loan business to a much greater
degree than they were previously.
From the tone of meetings of our directors and small business
advisory councils and others I'd say that the mood has deteriorated a
little over the period since the last FOMC meeting. And based on what

10/6/92

-31-

we all read in the press more than anything that has been happening
locally, our reading of the national economy is that it is much worse
off than the local economy. Also, we have no disagreement with the
Greenbook forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I find the incoming statistics
very disappointing, particularly industrial production, new orders,
purchasing agents' reports, consumer attitudes, and housing starts.
On the other hand, the monetary aggregates look somewhat healthier, or
perhaps less sick is the right way to describe it.
Bank credit
apparently has begun to grow again, although certainly not
ebulliently. Attitudes are being affected by media expectations of
instantaneous increases in employment and decreases in unemployment to
reflect what is going on in the economy. The predilection to dwell on
gloom and doom is exemplified by the way they deal with headlines in
any economic article.
A good example is recent articles predicting
masses of bank failures and estimates as high as $80 billion of assets
in the banks that are due to fail over the next six months.
They
emphasize all of that instead of talking about the much stronger
earnings and the much healthier capital ratios that are typical in the
industry. The increasing uncertainty about our political future I
think is a major factor here.
With neither party candidate for
president offering a credible program for dealing with the nation's
problems, I'm more convinced than ever that the current partial
paralysis of the economy will continue until after the election and
that the expected clarification of what the future holds [will be
delayed].
In that kind of environment, I doubt that short-term interest
rates lower than those already in place will have any stimulative
effect. I think this is a time to say that the inventory in the candy
store is sold out; we should hold steady where we are to allow the
full effect of the previous easing and rationalize the attitudes on
the part of consumers to stimulate more vigorous growth.
Furthermore,
the risk of additional chaos in the foreign exchange markets and the
possible rekindling of long-term inflationary expectations is real in
my mind, and it can only be avoided by keeping with our present
stance.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, as I reflect on the period since
the last meeting, it seems that a lot has happened but very little has
changed. That may be the one thing that makes this meeting so
difficult for me certainly, and maybe for most of us.
We've been over
all this; we're still struggling with a recovery. I guess technically
we're about to have to call it an expansion. We should have crossed
over into new high ground during the third quarter by almost any
expected growth rate, for whatever that's worth. We're certainly
stretching out--forever it seems--the expected time to break out.
On
the good news side, the inflation news seems to keep improving. I
believe the restructurings that have been going on, financial and
otherwise, have been the big story of this situation and have been the
cause of this stretch-out we're going through.
They need to be
allowed to go through to completion.
I think it's very important for
the long run that this be allowed to work through. We've made a lot

-32-

10/6/92

of progress and I think policy has been about right in balancing the
need to get inflation down, the need to allow these restructurings to
continue and be completed, and the need to maintain something close to
I still believe all those things.
a decent economy in the process.
But, as I said last time we were together, at some point this has to
At some appropriate point we need to see some solid
be completed.
Otherwise, as has been indicated this morning, we run an
progress.
increasing risk of having this sluggishness begin to feed on itself.
And if indeed inflation is meaningfully lower than we're measuring it,
we may slip into deflation without realizing it and that might turn
out to be as hard to stop as inflation was.
I'll breathe easier--I guess we'll all breathe easier--when
we can generate some sense that there's an inertia of motion that is
I don't get that
beginning to take over from the inertia of risk.
Certainly, in the key area of employment, there's no sense
sense yet.
of any dependable improvement. Another issue that's beginning to gnaw
What is going to mark a completion of this restructuring
on me is:
Where is the
process?
Dick Syron touched on this a few minutes ago.
I've looked recently at debt service
new equilibrium going to be?
ratios both for households and corporations--debt service relative to
income and in the case of corporations relative to cash flow--and both
But if you look at their history
of those ratios are falling rapidly.
back to, say, 1960 or so, it's hard to identify any natural support
levels.
There is no easily identifiable equilibrium that one could
"When we get to this place we're going to have it made and it
say:
There was no equilibrium at all in the '80s; it
will balance out."
In the '70s there was
was just a steady increase in these burdens.
something that might be called an equilibrium level, but it was at a
In the '60s,
considerably lower level than where we are right now.
when there was some equilibrium for a period of time, it was a good
deal lower on both of those measures than where we are right now. I
can envision, I'm afraid, that we could easily fall back to that '60s
level given the psychology that seems to be abroad in the land right
now. If that's the case, it might imply that we have a long way to go
I have to say in candor that I've been relatively comfortable
indeed.
so far, but I'm beginning to experience the first faint cringes of
As time goes on, I'm a bit more ready to see some signs
impatience.
That's
that we are getting through this and I don't see them yet.
beginning to make me more nervous than I have been heretofore.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Looking at the data--they've been pretty well
discussed by a number of people--it's clear that our annual fallwinter swoon seems to be in full flower; it seems to be an annual
event.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It has been only two years.

MR. MULLINS. Actually, one could say 1990 was not a walk in
the park.
To me the data coming in are pretty consistently negative.
I thought the September employment report was worse than the August
one because of the collapse in hours and the implications for personal
income, spending, industrial production, and the like. And virtually
all the indicators for the real economy at least seem to be pointing
south. The Greenbook has translated this into 1 percent growth,
We can't really do anything
roughly speaking, in the fourth quarter.

10/6/92

-33-

about that fourth quarter to speak of here, although we might think
about the implications of the fourth quarter on attitudes and spending
as we move into the quarters we can affect.
The question has been raised a number of times:
The Fed has
gone from a fed funds rate of almost 10 percent in '89 to 3 percent
now and where is the impact?
I think there has been an impact.
One
can see it most clearly in the broad statistics on the banking
industry; when you look at the entire industry compared to the fall of
1990 I think it has improved dramatically. As Ed Boehne pointed out,
though, there is a segment--and that segment is an economically
significant one--which is finding this period quite difficult. We
don't need to go through the statistics, but I asked at the briefing
the other day about the market value to book value ratios for the top
50 banks.
In December 1990, it was about 85 percent; they were
showing 85 percent of book and now it's 150 percent.
So, I think
there has been a big improvement there.
I believe the corporate
restructuring is going quite well.
In fact, corporations are issuing
commercial paper again, which suggests that they are moving right
along. The consumer side is the difficult side because consumers,
unlike banks and corporations, can't issue equity.
And they have a
long, tough process. They've reduced debt burdens but it's not clear
to me that the principal of the debt has been reduced.
So, I think
there have been benefits but primarily in cushioning this process and
moving it along. One only has to look at the experience of economies
that are going through this de-leveraging process without the benefit
of a responsive monetary policy. The UK would be a prime example;
they've had more than two years of negative growth and 10 percent
unemployment. There are a number of economies like that, and I think
there but for the grace of monetary policy goes the U.S. economy.
Indeed, when you look around--we had a staff review of the
industrialized economies around the world--the United States looks
like the fastest horse or the best horse on a very sloppy track, and
it's getting sloppier all the time.
I think monetary policy can be
credited with the fact that we haven't had a very severe situation
here.
I know all of this is cold comfort, but I think it's hard
reality, and I'm glad I'm not running for election in this campaign.
We just have to admit that this restructuring process is severe,
persistent, and long-lived and, indeed, for a consumer with excess
debt, there's no quick and easy fix.
It just takes a long time of
People are comparing this with
diverting resources to pay it down.
short-term cyclical adjustments [but] as has been suggested, the
process is long and severe.
And other countries are learning that as
well.
The next question is:
Would additional rate cuts have any
substantive beneficial impact?
It seems to me that there are sound
reasons for believing additional actions would be beneficial-beneficial to the growth of M2, which is still weak. We'd certainly
get another prime rate cut.
We're right on the cusp of a prime rate
cut, and I do not expect that to unleash a wave of borrowing and
spending. It may be helpful to reinforce this recent very modest
uptick in borrowing, but most pertinently it would reduce the debt
burdens on firms and on individuals who have home equity loans tied to
the prime rate.
Moreover, those who analyze the outstanding stock of
mortgages at different interest rates project that a lowering of rates
would ignite yet another significant round of mortgage refinancing.
And, of course, the market expects and seems to have priced in

10/6/92

additional action, so it wouldn't surprise anyone.
I might add that
just because I believe the next shot will be a potent shot does not
necessarily mean we should fire it.
Indeed, I'm not so sure about the
[potency of the] shot after that and it might be nice to have a potent
shot around.
I think the timing of any additional action is
difficult.
While the real economy is clearly decelerating and the
deceleration has momentum, we do have a substantial slug of ease in
the system. The fed funds rate is down 75 basis points over the past
three months.
As Governor Angell pointed out, the 30-year bond is
down 50 basis points.
The 10-year rate is down 100 basis points in
the last three months.
The dollar has fallen. We've seen some pickup
in M2; even with a yield curve adjustment, it's still probably below
our lower bound, but that deceleration has stabilized.
And we have
the slight hint of a pickup in credit demand. Business loans at banks
and at finance companies, commercial paper, and the debt aggregate all
have shown some stirrings.
Now, of course, this could simply reflect
a financing of the modest backup in inventories, but I would hope that
is not the case.
So, we have some stirring in both money and credit
growth and we also already have a refinancing boom in full flower now
both in the corporate sector and in mortgages.
So, I think we do have
some countervailing financial force already at work against the real
economy.
And there is risk in moving in the current environment on
the currency side as the dollar has fallen to new lows.
So has the
long bond rate.
So, I think it's difficult to argue that this has
ignited inflationary fears or flight of foreign investors so far.
But
if we should move, I would acknowledge that there is some risk of
destabilizing the dollar.
The hot money speculators are bulging with
profits from their European escapades. And if they did start an
attack, who would stop it?
Who would stand in the way of a run on the
dollar?
The Administration has not evidenced any strong concern over
a weak dollar.
Central bank intervention has not been impressively
efficacious in recent weeks, to understate the situation. So it seems
to me that there is some chance, however remote, that we could have a
problem there, and that would be disruptive.
I agree with Tom Melzer
that it might be difficult to get the genie back in the bottle because
this [move] would be one which would infect the bond and stock market.
And that argues for a little caution.
So far it hasn't affected the
bond and stock market as far as I see. And, of course, there are
other potential shocks and uncertainties looming in the pre- and postelection periods.
All of this argues for [some] caution and saving a
little ammunition.
There is also, of course, the very real risk of going too
far.
This will turn around some day.
I have no persuasive evidence
to support that statement [Laughter], but I do believe this will end.
Given the lags associated with monetary policy and the risk that
headwinds could become modest tailwinds, we should not overreact to
pessimism on the real economy.
Nonetheless, given the weakness in the
real economy and the need to reinforce weak growth in money and credit
if the current trends continue, we likely will be confronted with a
persuasive case for a rate cut.
Indeed, I think the case is fairly
persuasive now. The timing and execution are difficult. I tend to
think it has been quite useful that we haven't moved in the past few
days.
Nevertheless, there's some danger in being too cute on timing
and losing momentum--and the momentum we have in the aggregates is
real--and risking a severe deterioration. We may be able to avoid a

10/6/92

rate cut if things start to firm; the timing of additional action is
difficult and we need to discuss that.
In my own mind the appropriate
policy stance is clear. We ought to lean very hard toward additional
action and be prepared to ease if confronted with more disappointing
forward-looking data.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Our District continues [to expand] at a very
modest pace overall and employment is up just a little over last year.
The agricultural sector is flat; there may be a little decline in
[farm] income, even though crops are good, because prices are less
robust. Manufacturing is basically flat.
Our aircraft industry is
suffering because of the reduced demand overseas.
Our manufacturing
of autos is either flat or there is significant [unused] capacity.
So, there is not a lot of activity there.
As far as construction
goes, the residential sector is still strong throughout the District
and in some areas the nonresidential sector remains good.
In the
energy sector, the movement in natural gas prices is in a sense
positive. I think more fundamentally than the effects of the
hurricane there has been an improving trend; supplies have been
brought into a little better alignment with demand so prices are
increasing nationally.
In talking to people in that industry, though,
they say if that were to continue, they wouldn't really have resources
until sometime next year, so that's not an immediate pickup for our
District at all.
On the national scene, we have no real differences with the
Greenbook. We're not quite as pessimistic for the fourth quarter.
Fundamentally, we're looking at the negative numbers and adjusting our
projections of real activity down a little. Also, like the staff, we
do not expect inflation to be a major problem.
With regard to policy considerations, I have to admit I'm a
little more ambivalent about easing than I was last time, partly
because we have talked to business people, as others of you have, and
they're saying that interest rates are not a problem right now. We
don't need it, given the other aspects of the economy and the socalled headwinds we've talked about.
Credit growth is a little better
and I have some concerns about the foreign exchange situation. But on
balance I'm personally still comfortable with easing because we are
looking at a continued [sluggish] and maybe even weakening economy.
And while I say that credit is improving, it's still weak in every
way.
The monetary aggregates, M2 and so forth, are still weak by
every definition. And price inflation is not at this point a major
issue; we don't see inflation picking up again given these other
factors and, therefore, we have some room to ease.
And on the margin
I feel that easing would facilitate this restructuring that is still
in process, even though we don't know where the equilibrium may be.
We know it is in process and there are still significant adjustments
that have to take place.
So, as I wash all this out, I have to come
down on the side of some further ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN.
I've met with a number of people throughout the
District in recent weeks, and the general sense is that our area of
the country is now fully recovered from the 1982 recession.

10/6/92

-36-

[Laughter]
We didn't experience the 1990-91 one.
Employment growth
has been better than the nation; industrial production has been better
than for the nation; jobs are up about 1-1/2 percent since the
beginning of the year. The unemployment rate hasn't come down as much
because labor force growth is very strong. Other people following me
could be moving back from southern California to the Midwest.
In many
respects it's somewhat of a reversal of what we saw in the '85-'89
period when I was out West.
We have a large number of major national retail organizations
headquartered in the District.
In talking with them they say this
September was better than they had expected, better than earlier
months, and better than they [had first] thought.
There was a bigger
pickup in sales post Labor Day.
We're running retail sales increases
in our District of about 6-1/2 percent versus 4 percent nationally,
but they say they are seeing better numbers across the country than
they had expected and they are raising their expectations now about
Christmas retail sales. They say home-improvement related items and
furnishings have been extremely strong--double-digit increases.
People aren't getting any yield on their assets in the banks so they
put it in the brick and mortar of a patio or something.
We're the second largest auto and auto-related manufacturing
District in the country. And while the auto companies report flat
sales and some concerns, the auto suppliers are more optimistic
because they've been getting orders from the transplant companies.
They feel that they are very competitive with imports.
They're taking
back some market [share] they previously had lost. Heavy truck orders
are much better than expected just a couple months ago [and the truck
manufacturers] are feeling very good about their backlog. Home sales
and home starts are strong throughout the District, going along with
the better employment and labor force that we have in our area.
The Fourth District round table economists--mostly nonbank
business economists with a few bank economists in there--met recently
and they are more optimistic than the Greenbook. They have 3 percent
real GDP as an average forecast of the group for 1993.
There has been
some improvement in their inflation outlook; it's still up around
3-1/2 percent but trending down.
More people are talking about
inflation going under 3 percent than just three months ago when the
group met.
So, we've had a little movement there.
Our banks are even better than Tom Melzer's banks. We have
the strongest banks in the country. Aggregate market capital is
second only to New York; without Morgan and Bankers Trust we beat them
all. None of the banking assets in our District are owned [by banking
institutions] outside the District. Our banks are looking for earning
assets; they're giving incentives to go out looking for loans. My
head examiner was in to see me worried about the banks looking too
hard for loans; I said "Don't worry about it yet."
They're also
looking for opportunities to inject capital into banks in other
Districts, so you will be hearing from them a lot in 1993 as they seek
opportunities to spread their skills and their capital.
Talking with business leaders about their strategies for the
'90s has been very interesting.
They characterize the past as having
been an environment of counting on rising sales where they hire
people, order some stuff, mark it up, and they make money. Their new

-37-

10/6/92

strategy is not to expect increases in sales in the '90s but basically
to view the situation as one where all increases and earnings are
going to come from cutting costs:
reductions in the work force and
productivity increases. When I asked both large and small businesses
about their inflation expectations, there was a contradiction [in
their responses].
They say they can't raise their prices at all; they
have no expectation or plans to raise their prices and in some cases
they talk about how rapidly the prices would be cut in the future.
But they expect nationwide inflation to remain high.
So, when I
question them about how they are going to handle that with their labor
costs or what their employees think of it, they say "It has to come
from productivity or we're in a deep stew."
Dick Syron asked about
the [economy's] engine.
I look at what both households and businesses
are doing; they are basing their plans on the expectation of higher
inflation in the future, with the idea that it is transitorily low
[now] and is going to rise. And we're engaged in policy actions that
say "No, inflation is not only down but it's going to go even lower."
That inconsistency between what is out there in the marketplace and
what we're doing is creating this drag. Now, there are two ways to
reconcile that. Either we simply conform our actions to their
expectations or we try to do whatever we can to help accelerate the
process of their adjusting their expectations down to where we intend
to go on policy. I ask business people why they don't believe us when
we say we're going to zero inflation.
I tell them the budget deficit
or other things they worry about don't matter; it's what the central
banks does that determines that.
They just sort of shrug and say they
don't believe it.
They say we keep easing policy in order to promote
growth, and one of these days it's going to wind up in higher
inflation. I point to slow M2 growth and how we're all trying to work
toward a stable price environment, and they tend just to shrug it off.
I think the issue we have to attack is the credibility of our
commitment; we as a Committee need to convey in the clearest way we
possibly can that we are going toward zero inflation.
That's what we
should tell them about how to gauge our policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

I had two thoughts:
One was on the economy and
MR. LINDSEY.
was prompted by something Mike Kelley said; the second was on the
financial markets.
Twenty years ago I was sitting in freshmen
economics with Samuelson's Eighth Edition, and the first thing we were
taught was something called the "paradox of thrift."
The paradox of
thrift was the 1972--or probably the 1952--way of saying "balance
sheet restructuring will lead to less economic activity."
When I
thought of Governor Kelley becoming impatient, all I could think of
was Keynes's famous quip about how in the long run we are all dead.
And that was, in fact, the response.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What about the parable of the bees?

MR. LINDSEY. Well, we've been trying to unlearn Keynesian
economics for the last 20 years and that may have been a mistake
because, in fact, I think it's probably very close to the situation
we're in now with balance sheet restructuring in part caused by this
mismatch that Jerry Jordan just spoke of between inflation
expectations and our inflationary reality. As for the economy, I
think that's clearly in lousy shape, and my normal training would say
we should move to ease.

-38-

10/6/92

The second thing I'd like to talk about is financial markets.
Yesterday, frankly, I had a bit of an epiphany. I hope these things
I looked very closely at what happened
don't happen too much in life.
I can tell
in both the foreign exchange market and the stock market.
exactly what happened in the stock market because I've set up my
telerate to do that.
I couldn't tell [exactly] in the foreign
The stock market bottomed at minus
exchange market but it was close.
100 and something at exactly 11:29 a.m. And it looked as if the
foreign exchange markets did a similar thing. What is important about
Well, that's Fed time and the markets woke up and said
11:29 a.m.?
I don't
I assume that's what they did.
"Oh, they're not coming in."
know what else is important about 11:29 a.m.; maybe it was just one
data point and so I have an R-squared of one. But it looked pretty
convincing to me.
It's also where we hit the circuit breaker.
SPEAKER(?).

Yes, they hit the 100-point circuit breaker.

MR. KELLEY.

Yes, it worked.

MR. LINDSEY. It worked anyway.
So, I think yesterday the
market was telling us that their bet was we weren't in.
Looking at
the numbers, I also agree exactly with Joan and Bill's analysis that a
25 basis point reduction is factored into the market.
So, I have to
say I'm confused because on the one hand the market already has us in
and on the other hand the market is telling us not to come in.
The
only way I can work that out--and I worked it out to my own
satisfaction overnight, if not to anyone else's--was that I had your
model in mind.
What the market is not telling us is whether to
tighten or ease.
It's telling us something else and that is whether
this organization is in reactive mode or what I would call
If you watch the pattern of the market's reaction
deliberative mode.
to our not moving Friday and the pattern of its reaction to our not
moving yesterday, the relief came because we weren't panicked. We
were waiting for this every sixth-week meeting and we were actually
going to sit down and talk through rationally what we were going to
do.
And I think the markets were applauding us for having done that.
Now, again, it doesn't answer what we should do; but it does say that
we get rewarded for being deliberative and not reacting to the latest
employment report.
So, that was my epiphany.
Now, what should we do?
I think, frankly, that our next move
It might be because there is a sharp break in
is going to be to ease.
the market and we have to move in to the stem the gap--something like
the October '87 [episode], perhaps.
I hope that's not the case
because then we are back to the reactive mode.
It might be because,
as Ed Boehne said, the Fed should be viewed as doing anything we
reasonably can in the face of the current economic statistics, which
are bad.
That could be reactive or it could be deliberative.
The
question is: When do we move? Option one is to wait for the new
Administration, until January 20th or later.
Clearly, the next
Administration is going to need help no matter who wins the election.
We're going to have a fiscal stimulus which is going to send long
rates up; and while fiscal policy is going to be more stimulative, I
think its quality is going to go down, in particular with regard to
getting small business and employment taxes.
I think health care is
going to be hit no matter who wins the election. And while it's good
for us in the long run, it's lousy for the health care industry in the
short run and that's one of the few growth industries we have.
So,

-39-

10/6/92

we're going to add our hospitals to the layoff lists next year.
That's a case for waiting until January, when [the economy is] going
to need help.
We could wait until after the election but before
January; I wouldn't recommend that.
It's going to be a time of
maximum uncertainty largely because appointments are going to be
coming out at a rate of about one every two or three days.
I would
not want our actions to be interpreted as applauding or rejecting
particular nominees, say, for Secretary of the Treasury. The other
possibility is to act now at this meeting.
I believe that's the
commendable course of action. Even if I don't know what the rules are
on our specifying a time-- whether or not we have to vote to do it
today--I think we should take the action here at this meeting and not
leave it to random events in the future.
I think the odds that we
will be [easing] before the next meeting are overwhelming.
I think it
will come either from a stock market break or because the economic
statistics will make it imperative for us to do so.
Given that choice
and given that reality, I think we should be deliberative and not
reactive and we should vote to ease here today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's almost time for dinner,
so I'll be brief. First of all, I don't see anything new on the
economic outlook that differs from the bulk of what has been said
around the table. I do think that attitudes have gotten at least a
bit more glum.
I put a lot of weight on Mike Prell's simultaneity
paradox of linkages or reverse linkages among income, employment, and
spending, especially in a context in which the saving rate is already
very low and we're not going to get any more spending through a
reduction in the saving rate.
I think there is superimposed on top of
that a whole lot of concerns that intensify those things that are
somewhat easy to identify--some of them political, some of them
involving a growing recognition that out there in the great beyond
there is a very large, very expensive series of national economic
problems that are going to have to be dealt with in a context in which
there are vast social problems that also have to be dealt with. And I
think people worry about that.
So, as I said, the bottom line in
terms of the outlook is more of the same with, if anything, a tilt
toward a bit more concern and a bit more sour expectations.
I agree with those who said that inflation in some sense is a
non-issue, whether it's measured correctly or not.
I also agree with
those who are saying that whether the Fed does something now or next
week is not going to have a whole lot of adverse implications for socalled Fed credibility on inflation. The inflation outlook is a lot
better, but it is a lot better because we're going to have 16, 17, or
18 straight quarters with an unemployment rate above 6-1/2 percent and
11 or 12 quarters with an unemployment rate above 7 percent. There's
no magic to it at all.
We have better inflation the old fashioned
way:
We paid for it.
I do have some sympathy, though, with Jerry
Jordan's comment or quandary as to why nobody quite believes there is
at least a fighting chance of preserving that [progress on inflation]
over time.
The main point I want to make--and others have said it in
slightly different ways--is that we do have a renewed case of the
financial jitters out there.
It's not all that hard to explain why
that's there.
I do think the principal points of vulnerability are

10/6/92

the stock market and the exchange market.
But I don't think anybody
is even remotely clairvoyant enough to be able to anticipate through
what channels a disturbance might work itself into those markets. And
that was the thrust of Bill McDonough's comments, if I can put words
in his mouth.
I also do not think that a modest change or even a big
change in monetary policy in the direction of ease right now is going
to forestall the possibility that one of those disturbances might
happen. It won't work that way; if anything, it might work the other
way.
But it will not work in the direction of forestalling it.
I agree with a number of comments that have been made that if
something starts to tilt the wrong way, the situation could get pretty
messy. Ed Boehne's comment about four hours ago about limited tools
But having said that,
in a foreign exchange situation is quite valid.
it is potentially dicey.
I think it's important to recognize, as a
number of people have said, that major banks and major nonbank
financial institutions in the United States, with one or two obvious
exceptions, are in a much stronger condition today than they were in
1990, or in '87 or '84 or '82; and that's a plus.
What is not a plus
is that the second-tier institutions, especially nonbanks, are in
weaker condition. And it's also important to recognize that if we get
into one of these [situations], all institutions are going to be a lot
more defensive. That may be good news in one sense, but it's bad news
in another sense in that it makes it that much more difficult to deal
with them. So, no matter what the Committee in its wisdom decides
about near-term monetary policy in the conventional meaning of the
word, I think that decision should be couched in a context in which it
is implicitly understood that in the period ahead there could be
circumstances in which the Desk or Desks will need at least a margin
of greater flexibility.
In terms of monetary policy in conventional terms, I am very
much of the view that for a variety of reasons the better course of
action, at least for the moment, would be to "maintain."
I'd have a
distinctly asymmetric bias but I would not do anything. But above
all, whatever the Committee decides about policy as a whole, we need
to recognize that there could be circumstances where on a day-to-day
basis an extra margin of flexibility is going to have to be built in.
I don't think that has to be part of the directive, but it has to be
recognized.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS.
Well, since I think I am the last one to
speak, I'll be very short.
I'm much more comfortable with the
Greenbook forecast this time--the marking down [of the economic growth
projection].
I've been a bit more pessimistic all along with respect
to the real economy.
I'm not pleased to see a markdown to 1.2 percent
real growth in the fourth quarter, but I think it's fairly realistic.
I'm also in agreement generally that inflation is under control by
almost any measure. And I think we're getting to where--with the
discussions of what the CPI means, the measurement problems, and so
on--we're recognizing that we may be getting close to that
deflationary point that Governor Kelley mentioned.
The fact that
we've gone on so long with this weak economy adds another uncertainty
generally.
The uncertainty is reflected in the market.
We've talked
about the political uncertainty, and certainly the international
uncertainty is reflected in the markets.
As for the uncertainty with

10/6/92

-41-

respect to how long this balance sheet adjustment is going to go on,
though, the duration of this weakness and of the adjustment process is
continuing to drag people down and that is further damping the
capability of the economy to recover.
The last couple of times we've scratched our heads trying to
figure out what M2 was telling us and whether or not we should change
So we said we weren't going to do
the cones or move the cones around.
anything because we didn't know enough about what the monetary
We've seen some small improvements in M2
aggregates were telling us.
lately but it still looks as if it's moving sideways. Maybe the
monetary aggregates were telling us more than we were paying attention
to earlier.
With respect to exchange rates, I recognize that if we
allow the dollar to be a policy constraint for us, we may end up
lengthening the cycle--lengthening this long period of slow economic
growth--and in fact it may hurt us in the long run.
Adding all of these things up, I come out thinking that we
I'm somewhat
probably are going to need another easing move.
concerned about its timing; care needs to be given to when we do it.
I'm not enthusiastic about this reputation that we seem to have
garnered that we react to various things and I'm a little concerned
about getting "gamed" by the traders who I think are having a rather
So, I come out for a move toward ease but I
grand time these days.
think the timing needs to be considered carefully.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's really quite late, so let's take a
very short coffee break--in fact, 10 minutes.
[Coffee break]
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I saw him nod; some of
[Statement--see Appendix.]
us are very attuned to those nods.
If not, let me
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any questions for Don?
This has to be one of the most difficult periods for
start off.
The reason essentially is that we're
policymaking that I remember.
dealing with an outlook that is far more difficult to fathom than I
It is by no means certain
think any of us had really thought about.
that the restructuring model we're looking at is of the type that I
discussed here a couple of meetings ago; [that model involves]
affecting the restructuring process and the improved balance sheet
process by a level of interest rates that essentially over time
restructures the balance sheets and induces a restoration of spending
out of cash flows. The alternate model I raised was what I called the
"seize-up" model, namely that what we are looking at is an old 19th
century major balance sheet seizing up under crisis conditions in
which if we inject liquidity and ease into the market, it temporarily
looks as though it is recovering but then as the stimulus runs out it
reverts to the old [19th century process] of very rapid balance sheet
And what we find is that the cash flow that is being
adjustments.
engendered gets disproportionately shifted toward balance sheet repair
and savings and there is general weakness in economic activity. As
Governor Mullins indicated, this is a sort of periodic "fall" problem;
I'm not sure
it's the third straight year that we've run into this.
that the date is particularly relevant, but there is evidence that
I do, however, think
[economic activity] does not wish to accelerate.
it is premature to conclude that what we are dealing with is a

10/6/92

-42-

cumulative process in which the previous injections of liquidity have
petered out and the economy is now beginning to "seize up" again and
move toward a negative growth pattern.
If that were actually
occurring right now, it's hard to believe we would have the auto and
truck sales numbers that were released yesterday, which were fairly
good.
I also wonder whether the other evidence of reasonably good
retail sales would be emerging; and I wonder whether loan demand,
which may be nothing more than a shift from external financing to
commercial bank financing, means all that much. These are very
fragile indications [on the positive side] and I must tell you I
scrounged very hard to find them. Nonetheless, it is not immediately
evident that we are moving toward a cumulative deterioration.
As a consequence of that, I would be reluctant to move toward
further ease at this point.
But I do think we may be at the cusp of
some deterioration which just hasn't cumulated in the usual pattern
that one would expect. We have some fairly unstable financial
conditions, especially the stock market, that a number of you have
alluded to. There is unquestionably a potential danger in easing and
I think we have to be very careful of that when we are looking at the
market responses to what we are doing or what everyone thinks we are
doing. We are largely getting a response from the dealers who
inventory bonds and who react very rapidly to what they think we are
doing.
It's not altogether clear that they are going to judge their
retail markets, their pension funds, correctly. It may very well be
that one of these times, when we see bond markets getting very strong
with the expectation of ease, we're going to find that that's a result
of a build-up of inventories on the part of dealers who are unable to
sell them to their customers, and the markets will reverse very
sharply.
So, we have a very touchy problem here.
I'm aware, as you
all are, that everyone expects us to ease and that becomes a selffulfilling activity. While the case for easing right now is quite
strong, I would be far more inclined to wait for a short while--maybe
a couple of weeks--to see what is developing in the financial markets,
what is developing in the foreign exchange markets, what is developing
in Europe, and what is developing in the overall economy.
I do not
think one can argue, especially in the context of some of the
discussions I've heard here, that this economy is slipping off the
edge.
It may; we may find evidence of that within a reasonable period
of time.
I would argue further that if we do not get improvement
within the next couple of weeks, the odds will then very strongly
favor [the hyposthesis] that this "seize-up" model I mentioned at the
beginning is functioning.
So, having gone back and forth in the last
48 hours looking at all sorts of numbers, I myself would feel most
comfortable with a hard asymmetric directive toward ease, reflecting
the fact that we would do nothing at the moment. But unless we begin
to see some firming in particular indicators, I do think we should
move lower.
I say this without a great conviction because anyone who
has a great conviction at this stage about what the economy is doing
or what proper policy is I think is under a mild state of delusion.
I would like to say finally that I wish we had the luxury to
sit back and do nothing until after the election, as is the
conventional procedure of the Federal Open Market Committee.
I don't
think we have that luxury. However, I don't think the markets have
been viewing anything we have been doing as politically motivated.

-43-

10/6/92

There are obviously those who make those statements, but I don't think
that's a serious issue confronting us.
So, I would dismiss that as a
consideration; it's not something we need to be overly concerned
But if the money supply weakens and the markets behave poorly
about.
and we have the evidence that we've getting cumulative deterioration-or more exactly that the economy is not picking up, which is I think
the main criterion at this particular stage--I do think that we should
move toward ease.
And ease in this context I would say definitely
would require a discount rate cut and some action on the funds rate.
So, I would put that out as a recommendation to start the discussion
and hope somebody may be able to expand on it with some great insights
as to how policy is functioning.
MR. LAWARE.

Question, Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. LAWARE. As stated in the Bluebook, "A" requires a
reduction immediately in the federal funds rate to 2-1/2 percent.
that your intent?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Was

No, I'm arguing for "B."

All right,

"B."

I thought you said "A."

I'm

sorry.
I'm
I may have said "A" then "B."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
arguing for alternative B asymmetric toward ease, with the expectation
that if the economy fails to show signs that it's [improving], we will
President Jordan.
reconsider whether to move.
MR. JORDAN. I wish I had more confidence about what
indicator to look at to gauge our policy. But much more so I wish the
private decisionmakers had more confidence about how they will be able
to gauge our policies in the future because it's our future policy
actions that are going to influence their decisions most.
It struck
me in recent weeks in looking at the turmoil in Europe that the
Germans have very slow growth in their narrow monetary aggregates and
very rapid growth in their broad aggregates and they chose to gauge
their policy by M3.
They have a sharply inverted yield curve at a
very high level of nominal interest rates and what we would generally
regard as high real interest rates and an extraordinarily strong
currency. We have had a very steep yield curve, very low short-term
interest rates relative to long rates, [low] recent inflation,
extraordinarily rapid growth in the narrow aggregates, which is
disturbing, and almost no growth at all in the broad aggregates, M2
And we tend to characterize our policies by the broader
and M3.
aggregates as having been restrictive, which is not consistent with
our weak currency. The markets seem to be saying--looking at a lot of
indicators, including surveys--that our policies have been and will
continue to be expansionary and that the Germans' policies have been
and will continue to be restrictive.
I'm not sure the Germans are right in looking at M3, but they
I'm
keep saying they are going to persevere and people believe them.
not sure that we're right in saying M2 is the right measure, but
people are not believing it and do not believe that we are going to
Don Kohn in his remarks mentioned the risks about how to
persevere.

10/6/92

perceive what we do and why.
If it's clear that it's due to a weak
economy and that in the future we're going to maintain slack in the
economy, then maybe the markets would take it okay.
But that casts
this Committee as being anti-growth, and I'm not anti-growth. I'm not
comfortable with the idea that we're going to maintain slack and slow
I want price
growth as the method of achieving price stability.
stability because I want fast growth.
I would prefer at this point to take Committee action to
complete what we suspended on July 1st, and that is setting targets
for 1993--what I argued for then but didn't succeed in getting. I'd
suggest that we announce a reduction in the [M2] target range for
I think we
1993; my preference would be a full percentage point.
should have been at 2 to 6 percent this year and I think we should
have 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent for next year.
I'd go ahead and announce
it and couple it with an immediate action to inject reserves and
probably to cut the discount rate because of the necessity of a press
release in order to say we are taking action as a Committee to achieve
the minimum of our target range in monetary growth. I'd say we are
not satisfied with being below the target, we want to get growth up
[within the range], and we're at the same time lowering our target
range for next year because we're not going to let [growth exceed] the
top end of the range either. We should take this step, coupling what
is perceived as an easing action in the short run with an announcement
of lowering the target range for '93 as re-enthroning M2 because it's
the only horse we have to ride to gauge our policies at this time.
Until such time as the Committee is ready to say we are going to
restructure M2 or switch to some other aggregate, we have to stick
with M2 because it's what we have, just as the Germans have to stick
with M3 with all of its faults.
I wish we had their credibility.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Jerry, let me just comment on this for a
second.
I think you're raising a crucial question about whether we
should lock back in on a specific aggregate. We obviously are
confronted with the difference between the yield curve effect on Ml
versus M2 and M3.
It would be nice if we had a particular conviction
that one or the other or some other M was the best one; if we did,
then clearly we should lock in.
But I don't know if we can say that
merely locking in, irrespective of whether in our judgment it's the
right measure on which to lock in, is a wise move.
So, while you're
raising a correct issue--that we really ought to review our guidelines
--I think it's regrettable but it's a little late in the game for this
meeting.
But I do think that should be on the agenda for the next
meeting because we did, in fact, say that we would do it before next
year, and the next meeting would be the appropriate time to do it.
But to make a judgment that we are locking in on M2--enthroning it as
you put it--presupposes that we have confidence that that's the right
measure.
I would much prefer to be uncommitted to which particular
money aggregate we are functioning with until we have a judgment as to
what we want to work with. If M2 is wrong and we lock in, we're going
to have far more difficulties in aligning ourselves than if we lock
into something when we have considerable confidence.
I don't think we
have that confidence at this stage.
President Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL. As I was reflecting on the policy stance for
this meeting last night, I thought about what I have been doing over
the last three weeks and I came to the conclusion that I have been
sitting in front of a screen becoming increasingly depressed almost on

-45-

10/6/92

a daily basis, perhaps even on an hourly basis, by the negative
numbers that were coming in. Not all of them were negative, of
course, but even going back to August we had a low number for
Orders are down, confidence is
employment and industrial production.
down. Exports, which had been a minor engine of growth, are off. M2
is improving a little.
All of this led me to conclude that what we
ought to do is to ease policy now. As other people have said, easing
policy--lowering interest rates--has helped the economy. And I think
additional ease would help in this particular situation.
I'm not sure
It
that we're not on the edge of a downward, cumulative, spiral here.
may not be upon us at this exact moment, but the potential is there.
So, I think we need to ease. But having said that, the case you made
for waiting is certainly a reasonable one; and certainly we have
So, I
offsetting considerations in the international exchange market.
would support your strong asymmetric-toward-ease directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to set aside for the
moment the issues of financial instability and what could happen in
foreign exchange markets and the issues associated with being close to
But it seems to me that in many ways this has been a
the election.
In the past,
very different meeting from those we've had in the past.
we've seen a forecast where the economy looked as though it was going
to pick up almost imminently and that the rate of growth would be
something on the order of acceptable. There were certainly concerns
about whether or not that would be realized. That generally would
result in our having asymmetric language and then when we saw some
statistics come out that confirmed or heightened those uncertainties,
I think this is a unique meeting. This is a meeting
we would ease.
where the Greenbook has come up with a forecast that is much more
negative; it shows that the pickup is coming considerably later and
that when the economy does expand it's going to be less strong. Based
on the discussion, I counted approximately 11 who seemed to be in
substantial agreement with that and who voiced concern about the
That is far more powerful to me as [an
direction of the economy.
indication of] what we should do on policy--the work has been done
collectively by all of us and our staffs and in the Greenbook--than
what developments might occur in the next two to three weeks.
Consequently, I would recommend that we reduce rates--my proposal
would be 25 basis points in terms of the funds rate--and that we have
asymmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I was hoping we would come into
this meeting and be prepared to be patient, be prepared to seize the
initiative from financial markets and indicate that we were conducting
monetary policy in a deliberative way as Governor Lindsey suggested.
I think what you've given us, Mr. Chairman, is a courageous action in
that it does step back from market expectations. However, there is a
difference between courage and foolhardiness; and no matter how
strongly I believe that it would be appropriate for us not to take a
step at this time, I do want to see how the markets react to this news
So, it's a
because what you've suggested is, it seems to me, news.
courageous step and I think we should see how the markets behave [in
If at a point in time the
reaction to] the step that we're taking.
Board of Governors were to decide to lower the discount rate, then it

10/6/92

-46-

would be appropriate under those circumstances to have a telephone
conference call.
Even though my preference would be a straight "B,"
you certainly accommodate what I believe is appropriate under these
conditions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, it may be that epiphanies only
happen rarely; it's probably good for the soul that it's that way. I
looked at the list of upcoming indicators and I have to say I agree
with President Parry:
I don't see one that would convince me any more
than the discussion that we had around the table today as to what
shape the economy is in.
The major statistic coming out is industrial
production; we know what that is; that's going to be released a week
from Friday. The other two big indicators are the PPI and the CPI.
I
don't think they really give us a-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think initial claims, which come out
[soon], are a very crucial indicator of short-term deterioration; it
has been one of the problems.
The retail sales figure [could] show
weakness.
Again, what I think we
MR. LINDSEY. Yes, you're right.
should do is for this Committee to establish the guidelines; that
decision should be made here [today] because we're being gamed very
much the way the European central banks were being gamed.
With each
major statistic that comes out, people take sides; [people talk about]
the possibility that someone may have some inside knowledge or rumors
spread that someone has it and that's going to affect Fed actions;
that is what is driving markets. Frankly, I think that's increasing
the instability in the markets. And the way to restore stability to
the markets in part is to have this body make decisions and have a
fixed date rather than an effectively random date for taking actions.
One particular area of instability that has been mentioned is the
foreign exchange market, and that is an area of concern.
But I would
make two observations. First of all, to the extent we have a concern
about the foreign exchange market, it would not fit into the paradigm
of strongly asymmetric because the only "cure" that we would come up
with would be an increase in rates, and I don't see that coming.
Also, I think the fundamentals are quite different here in the United
States. I think the United States is like France and not like Italy
or the UK in that we do not have an obviously overvalued currency;
quite frankly, we have an undervalued currency.
So, for both of those
reasons I don't think the foreign exchange instability is a reason for
not acting now.
I think we ought to make the decision here.
In my
mind that decision could even be a contingent decision:
contingent on
having over 400,000 or whatever you would like in the initial
unemployment claims or a CPI under 3 percent. But I really think
there's an advantage in our making the decision here today, and that
would be my very strong preference.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I might say that the decision will be
made obviously also in conjunction with the Board of Governors on the
discount rate, so that issue gets involved.
MR. LINDSEY.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

-47-

10/6/92

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the policy decision that we
face this morning is, as Don said, essentially a matter of weighing
the risk of a renewed deterioration in the economy against the risk
that a further easing at this juncture will damage our credibility and
might not do any good in any event. My real preference, reading the
tea leaves the way I do, is to do something now--move a quarter point
--but I can accept your formulation of "B" with an asymmetric
directive. But I want to underscore what Jerry Jordan said:
This
decision would be a lot easier if we had cut those targets back in
July. Governor Angell and I felt strongly enough about advocating a
cut in the [1992] targets [in July 1991] that we actually dissented on
[the vote to retain them].
But if we do cut them regularly, I think
we establish the credibility whereby we can make these short-term
lowering [moves] without scaring the market half to death because we
would reassure them that we have not lost sight of our long-term
targets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, for all the reasons I stated
before, I would prefer "B" symmetric because I don't have any
confidence that a further change in rates can accomplish the
And I'm very
stimulative effects that it's supposed to have.
reluctant to take the risks that are inherent in the foreign exchange
markets, which I believe are there. On the other hand, I think your
argument that we need some emergency firepower in the event of an
accident or a surprise is persuasive for asymmetric language.
But I
would prefer to have it symmetric with the idea of reconvening the
Committee if the emergency happens. Maybe the emergency will happen
too fast to make that practical, but until I hear the other comments
around the table I'd like to be recorded as favoring "B" symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. In general, Mr. Chairman, I support your
recommendation and would only add a couple of thoughts. First of all,
in assessing the question of asymmetry and timing, I hope we cast a
relatively broad net.
I am concerned about the foreign exchange
markets. On the one hand, we seem to believe that the dollar is lower
than is sustainable but the presumption is that it's going to go lower
still; and that doesn't seem to me to be an equilibrium, let me put it
that way. On top of that, as we weigh the desirability or necessity
of additional interest rate cuts to sustain or further the recovery, I
hope that we will bear in mind its consistency with our long-run
objective for price stability. And I must say that I don't quite
understand what we would have gained by lowering the monetary
aggregate targets and locking in more tightly on M2 in these
circumstances.
There's certainly some information value in M2 but
there's also a lot of uncertainty surrounding both its behavior and
its implications for economic performance in the future, and I don't
see how we would enhance our credibility by focusing on something with
that degree of uncertainty associated with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, as time goes on here, economic
events are making the case for ease stronger and stronger. But I do
strongly support your recommendation for today because I do not think

10/6/92

-48-

this is a propitious time to ease. I worry that we could set off a
run on the dollar.
The traders are feeling their oats these days and
It's very
they might just like to take us on, and we don't need that.
important that the FOMC regain control of monetary policy, which I
think we have largely lost to the market and the media.
I do not
share the view that today is a day when we could look reflective
rather than reactive. Real rates are very low, as we've seen on the
handout distibuted here this morning. So, I don't think there is any
strong urgency, on that merit, to [move] today.
I think it's
desirable to get a reading on events as time goes along and desirable
to have our powder dry in case some of these potential emergencies
show up.
So, I strongly support your prescription.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the number of people
who have argued for us to take the initiative back [from] the markets.
I think the FOMC is the place to make these decisions and generally I
would prefer to make them during the meetings.
I have a continuing
preference for symmetric directives.
And given the turmoil in the
world right now and the low level of interest rates that we already
have, I think our best contribution could be to act as a force for
stability.
So, my preference, if I were a voting member, would be for
"B" with a symmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I think we all feel the ambivalence that you
talked about; there clearly is uncertainty.
I find it difficult to
believe that any of the new data that are going to come out in the
next couple of weeks will make this any clearer. Jerking the markets
around--first they think we will ease and then they think we won't and
then we try to come back and do it again--may have a cuteness to it or
too much cuteness to it, but I think that undermines our credibility.
There are times when you step up to the batter's box and you try to
get on base. We've had a good discussion but I think this discussion
is probably ahead of the data.
I would prefer to make the decision
and do it--and not try to second guess this event or that event or
this statistic or that statistic--by sticking to the fundamentals.
And I think the fundamentals call for lower rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I would prefer to act and I'd
prefer to act now. But let me add some qualifiers to this. This is
as tough a situation as we've seen, at least in a while. And it seems
to me that on the basis of the discussion there is little question
about which direction--unless we're happily surprised or we get
extraordinary shocks the other way--our next move will be.
Generally,
I have some sympathy for the
I prefer to do things at meetings.
arguments that were raised by Governor Lindsey in that regard.
We do
have uncertainties out there and I have no illusions about my ability
to read these uncertainties in terms of the exchange market or other
things that might come along.
There is this question of just how much
data we're going to get in.
I guess it depends on how one interprets
your recommendation. I interpret your recommendation on being highly
asymmetric toward ease as saying that the timing to some extent will
be decided by you. The direction is not necessarily completely

-49-

10/6/92

decided yet, but there would be a predisposition to ease--I was
writing down your words--unless we were to see some strengthening in
the economy. On that basis and given all of the uncertainties in the
economy and in institutions, I would reluctantly support your
recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, my view on today's decision really
is completely separate from either exchange market or other market
expectations or political issues.
It does seem to me that these are
matters that we can reasonably deal with, given any decision that we
come to today.
Rather, my decision would be based on the economic
situation, which I think clearly has weakened and quite considerably
At this point the risk that the economy could fall back into a
so.
negative situation is not insignificant; I think the balance here is
very delicate.
It seems to me that we already have the data that we
need to make a decision. It's very much there on the record.
Therefore, as I indicated in my comments earlier, I could live with
"B" asymmetric, but I frankly would have a far stronger preference to
move now and to use this meeting as a reason for making that decision.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. To repeat myself a little, Mr. Chairman, I came
in a little more ambivalent, and I think we have had a very good
discussion. The preponderance of views is that ease is appropriate. I
think now would be the time [to ease], having had the discussion, and
However, given your [explanation], I
it would be a deliberative move.
can live with "hard asymmetric."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Alan, if it were up to me, I'd prefer to take
action here at this meeting. Having said that, I would vote "no."
[Laughter]
I basically view the hard asymmetric you've described as a
It's almost a certainty. And for the reasons I've
decision to move.
articulated at other meetings, I just can't support that. I think
we're expecting far too much out of monetary policy as a short-run,
fine-tuning tool for the real economy. Frankly, I think there
probably would be some benefits in terms of stability and so forth in
The easing is over; now let's adjust to
communicating to markets:
this level of rates and work from here. I think there's ample
stimulus in train.
To cite a quote from you:
"My mild state of
delusion continues."
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS.
First of all, I'd like to support President
In
Jordan's suggestion that we take another look at the M2 cones.
If
essence, if M2 is a policy guide, we should have eased earlier.
it's not a policy guide but only an aggregate that we forecast, then
we should be lowering our forecast. So, I find this inconsistent
attention to M2 somewhat troubling. I would prefer to ease today, so
However, having said that, because of
my preference is alternative A.
my concerns about the traders' voracious attempts to "game" the System
--and having had first-hand experience with that crowd--I will
reluctantly support ["B"] asymmetric.

10/6/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I think there's a sufficient case for ease now
but I can support ["B"] asymmetric.
In terms of what information to
focus on, I think it will be useful to focus on money and credit flows
and how those develop.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Mr. Chairman.

Your prescription is fine with me,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Jordan, I never did get an
indication from you as to how you came out.
MR. JORDAN.

I'm still working on it!

[Laughter]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just say something that I think
is important for us to focus on.
This is a very close call here and
what I don't want to do is to convey a sense that I have some strong
conviction as to what is involved here.
I want to make certain that
we're not getting a Committee vote which merely acquiesces in a view
that I have stipulated because, as we have all indicated around this
table, this is an extremely difficult period.
I want to make certain
that we get a vote which is essentially a Committee vote rather an
acquiescence to the position of the Chairman.
Ordinarily, I would
never say such a thing!
[Laughter]
MR. ANGELL.

Which votes are you trying to lose?

[Laughter]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The fact is that we all recognize that
this is a very tough decision we are making and it's best that we all
say exactly what it is that we [prefer].
As a consequence of that, I
want to read off my notes to be sure that I have gotten everyone's
view and priorities correctly. Accordingly, I'm going to poll each of
you, starting from the bottom. President Syron would prefer easing at
this meeting but will accept asymmetric toward ease.
The same is true
of Governor Phillips [and of Governor Mullins].
Do I gather this
correctly?
MR. MULLINS.

I think there's a case for ease now but I--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

But that's not the

[unintelligible]

question.
MR. MULLINS.

I would go "B" asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That there is a case for ease now is
unquestioned, but what's your priority?
MR. MULLINS.

"B" asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

Your priority is asymmetric?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, your preference is asymmetric but
there is a case for easing; it's the other way around.

-51-

10/6/92

MR. MULLINS.

Yes.

President Melzer votes "no" on ease and
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Governor Lindsey very specifically
symmetric language with "B."
Governor LaWare wants symmetric now.
indicated a desire to ease now.
MR. LAWARE.

Symmetric

"B."

Governor Kelley wants
I'm sorry, "B."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
asymmetric toward ease, but I gathered from your comments that while
you could accept [a move toward] ease you would prefer not [to move]?
Mr. Chairman, I may be the only one at the table
MR. KELLEY.
[Laughter]
who supports you on the merits of your case!
He

MR. MULLINS.

[talked]

me into it.

President Hoenig is asymmetric toward
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
ease but could accept ease, if I gather correctly.
MR. BLACK.

But not

on the merits of the

case!

Governor Angell would not be in favor of
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would suspect that the
ease, but would do asymmetric toward ease.
Vice Chairman is asymmetric toward ease because that's his conviction.
MR. CORRIGAN.

That's

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
finally has his solution.

right.
I wonder whether President Jordan

The reason I have a problem with "B" asymmetric
MR. JORDAN.
is that no matter what we think it is we're doing [any action] will be
the result of real economic indicators and reinforce the idea that we
ease policy when the economy is soft and we are going to tighten
So, I
I have a problem with that.
policy when the economy is strong.
would prefer either to act today and do it because of weak money
growth and make it very clear that we're trying to get short-term
money growth up and long-term money growth down or, if we don't do
that, adopt "B" symmetric but without the discretion of judgment for
the future.
Okay, as I now reconfirm what the views
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
are, there is a majority for asymmetric toward ease in the form which
Therefore, I would request that you read
I originally stipulated it.
the [directive language].
"In the implementation of policy for the
MR. BERNARD.
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
In the context of the Committee's
of pressure on reserve positions.
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint might or
slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected
intermeeting period.
to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from
September to December at annual rates of about 2 and 1 percent,
respectively."

10/6/92

-52-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Hoenig
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Syron
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Let's go have lunch.

END OF MEETING

