Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
January 9, 1992

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Hoenig
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey (FRB Richmond)
Melzer
Mullins
Phillips
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, Keehn, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Black, and Forrestal, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond and Atlanta
respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, and Simpson,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Plotkin, Assistant Director, Division of
Banking Supervision and Regulation, Board of
Governors
Ms. Danker, Section Chief, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors

-2-

Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Barron, Hendricks, and Oltman, First Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of San
Francisco, Cleveland and New York,
respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
January 9, 1992
[Secretary's note:
Telephone communications problems made it
impossible to understand portions of the comments made during this
conference call.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good afternoon, everyone. As you know,
the purpose of this meeting is to discuss proposed changes to the
primary dealer system.
I'd like to call on Vice Chairman Corrigan to
lead the discussion.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman.
I assume that all members of the Committee have the draft paper that
was circulated by Gary Gillum the other day.
And I'm sure that you
all recognize that the draft paper reflects a very careful and
delicate balancing of a number of competing considerations and even
points of view. Having said that, it reflects a point view at this
juncture that [unintelligible].
I think the Committee members should
also recognize that at least in a rough sense this particular document
has to be thought of in the context of the intra-agency report of the
Federal Reserve, the SEC, and the Treasury that the three agencies
committed to back in September at the time of the first rounds of
Congressional hearings on the Salomon Brothers situation. Peter
Sternlight or Don Kohn can, if needed, provide Committee members with
the flavor of that report.
I would simply say that it is voluminous;
we project that the summary alone will run about 75 pages or more.
The only point I would make in reference to that report
pertains to these papers [unintelligible] agreement on the basis where
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York only has primary day-to-day
responsibility for market surveillance, which is sharply distinct from
dealer surveillance.
The latter, of course, requires [unintelligible]
along the lines [indicated in] the memorandum for the reasons set
forth [therein].
Don and Peter pointed this out, and they do refer to
a point of view that reflects our concerns [about] dealer
surveillance. The Committee members I think should also know that
[unintelligible], the report is likely to [be ready] for release on or
about Tuesday the 22nd of January. There could always be some
slippage there. [Unintelligible.]
But simultaneously when we release
the agency report, we will at least [consider] something along the
lines of making this internal view known. I should also say that
[unintelligible] in reading the introductory paragraph in the report
we are in the process of consulting with the Treasury and the SEC
about the view that [unintelligible].
What we're doing here [in this call is seeking] the
Committee's point of view on this particular issue and
[unintelligible] their support that is philosophically
[unintelligible] among the agencies support. Because that
consultative process is still going on, there are going to be some
Just as an example,
further [changes in the] words here and there.
Ted Truman earlier today made an excellent suggestion relating to the
fact that we shouldn't formulate into this the specific reference to
Even though I think our [views at the
the so-called [unintelligible].
New York Bank] are made [clear] in the report itself, Mr. Chairman,
any questions or comments or observations that Committee members have
on the paper and on this issue would be appropriate. When we finish

1/9/92

with that I might, Mr. Chairman, say a word or two on where we stand
with Salomon Brothers and potential sanctions pertaining to that firm.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would either Messrs. Sternlight or Kohn
like to add anything to this discussion?
I don't think I have anything unless there
MR. STERNLIGHT.
is a particular question, Mr. Chairman.
MR. KOHN.

Likewise.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Committee.

The floor is open for questions from the

There are a
MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, this is Ed Boehne.
First, I'll just say that I
couple of areas that I'd like to explore.
understand the hard work and the delicate balance built into this.
So, some of this really is for my own learning rather than anything
else. Jerry, there is a section of the paper dealing with dealer
In your comments you tried to distinguish dealer
surveillance.
surveillance from market surveillance; one we will discontinue and one
I understand what you're trying to accomplish by
we will continue.
If
What does it cost?
giving up dealer surveillance, but I wonder:
my memory serves me correctly, this had its origins in the failure of
a government securities dealer some years ago. And presumably we
thought we needed the information because of the lesson that we
learned in that episode.
So, I'm wondering what the disadvantages are
on that side of the ledger of giving it up and what you mean by market
surveillance versus dealer surveillance?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. First of all, Ed, I'll elaborate a
It
bit further on exactly what the dealer surveillance program is.
actually predates the Drysdale episode and related affairs of the
The
early 1980s.
In fact, it goes back considerably before that.
dealer surveillance [program] has been around [a long time] as a
statistical reporting program and even goes back to the 1960s.
Now,
[there is a] feature of the dealer surveillance program that has
accentuated this kind of "moral hazard" problem, which is really what
we're trying to get away from, recognizing that at least at this stage
I don't think we can get away from it totally, but I think we're
really going to [unintelligible].
Specifically, at its best, over a
period of many, many years a part of that dealer surveillance program
was a formal on-site visit or inspection program for the primary
As a [result] of that formal on-site inspection program--I'm
dealers.
being loose with words here--we have led ourselves and others into
believing that this is in some way the substantive equivalent of a
bank examination in which we are passing some kind of judgment about
their financial wherewithal, their managerial wherewithal, their
internal control systems, etc., when in fact the program was never
really up to that to begin with.
But more importantly, we have not
only the [unintelligible] these firms as primary dealers.
And that's
what we're trying to get away from.
I can say personally that I have
been uncomfortable about that aspect of this operation literally for
years. I think that feature of the dealer surveillance program
reinforces the impression in the marketplace that we are in fact
sprinkling holy water on them or anointing them. And that's the cycle
that we're trying to break from.

1/9/92

Now, the market surveillance is at least in general what it
says.
It involves adding a program, perhaps including some different
elements to our current statistics program, that aims at spotting
anomalies in the marketplace:
price distortions, possible squeezes,
conditions in the RP market involving specials that seem to raise
questions about patterns of trading, and activity in the market as a
whole. Again, Don and Peter can go into this in somewhat greater
detail. The [crux] is that to the extent we observe through that
market surveillance things that seem to suggest a potential violation
of law or regulation, we would have a responsibility to bring that to
the attention of the SEC or the Treasury or the Justice Department who
do have the enforcement authority. Though it may sound like
semantics, I think there is a very substantial substantive difference
between dealer surveillance on the one hand and market surveillance on
the other.
MR. BOEHNE. The other area that I have some questions on-again really for my own education--is the section dealing with
sanctions.
I realize that by its very nature this has to be fairly
general and that each case has to be based on its own merits.
But I'm
wondering about the "activities that relate directly or indirectly to
[a dealer firm's] business relationship with the Federal Reserve,"
which you talk about on the top of page 9. Just to take an example:
Suppose there were irregularities in municipal bond operations and
dealer government securities [operations] were clean.
Is that what
you mean by indirectly?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It could be.
First of all, what we
tried to do here was to make this process of setting standards much
more objective than it was in the past.
Again, we have to recognize
explicitly that we do not have either formal compliance enforcement
authority nor the authority to [impose] civil money penalties.
But we
felt that we had to maintain some semblance of fit and proper
standards and we wanted that to be as objective as possible. We
couldn't come up with something that was totally objective because--to
use an example that might be a gray area--it's certainly possible to
have a firm with [operational problems] that are removed from anything
remotely having to do with [government securities] operations but if
It was apparent when
they had [such] problems we would be concerned.
for example, not so long ago had some business with
some defense contracts.
Did that mean that we should feel the need
for [unintelligible] security [unintelligible]? So, there is a gray
Nevertheless, this
zone here and perhaps we won't [unintelligible].
is an effort to make it much more objective than it was in the past
but at the same time to leave a little flexibility. Obviously, this
is one of those places where we were doing a little high wire
balancing act.
I should also point out, Ed, that the [wording] is
carefully constructed, I think. For example, earlier on where we
talked about market-making and [meaningful] participation in Treasury
auctions, we say we reserve the right to [dis]continue their [primary
dealer] status but we say very specifically that it is strictly a
business decision and has no bearing on their financial strength,
We also have incorporated this
their managerial competence, etc.
capital maintenance standard but we wanted to differentiate that
clearly from the other two in a context in which it was as close to a
vigorously objective standard that we could come up with.

1/9/92

MR. BOEHNE. Had this document been in effect during the
recent Salomon Brothers episode, would it have caused you to approach
differently what admittedly was a tough decision on whether to suspend
them or not?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Had this document been in effect
then, I think it would have been much easier and people would have
known [unintelligible].
That is another virtue of it:
It takes away
the uncertainty. But there isn't any question in my mind that this is
precisely the kind of situation that would [unintelligible].
I should
also say, Ed, that there still is some debate going on about the
[unintelligible].
It was the bankers who really urged us to go ahead
and suspend this primary dealer.
There is [several words
unintelligible].
MR. BOEHNE.

Okay, thank you.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I had a couple of comments
about this.
Jerry, as I read the document, I thought first of all
that it was quite well written; but the impression I had when I
finished it was that it's really quite vague and that we are left with
really no indication of what the future might hold for the dealers.
I
suppose that was perhaps deliberate, if you're trying to balance the
specifics; but I just raise that as one impression that I had.
I
think market participants are going to raise a number of questions and
I suspect that probably will be one.
Secondly, I don't remember any
references to the foreign firms; I'm not sure how they would be
treated.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me read, Bob, for your benefit
the language that Ted Truman gave us this afternoon. Ted's
suggestion, which is a good one, was to add a paragraph on page 4
along the following lines:
"And finally, [several words
unintelligible].
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, that's helpful.
Much more
substantively, I have a concern that follows along the lines of the
questions that Ed Boehne raised and relates to this whole surveillance
issue.
I certainly agree that if we don't have any authority to
regulate dealers, we shouldn't be conducting any kind of monitoring or
surveillance and we shouldn't be examining their books.
I appreciate
the distinction that you're making between dealer surveillance and
market surveillance. But the question still lingers in my mind as to
who is ultimately going to be responsible for dealers and their
relationship to the market.
Clearly, the document spells out that
bank regulators have responsibility for bank dealers and the SEC has
responsibility for broker dealers and so on.
But a basic question is:
Do these people really have the expertise to monitor the dealers?
Can
we and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York get proprietary
information from these regulators and have the basic information that
we need?
I suppose this all comes down to a basic concern I have that
if something goes wrong--something of a systemic nature related to one
dealer or two or three dealers--it may be very difficult, it seems to
me, for us to maintain the position that we're just another
counterparty in these events. The overriding fear I have is that no
matter how much we disclaim our responsibility for surveillance, it's
a responsibility for which the Fed and the Treasury may very well be
implicated.
So, that's the basic concern I have now; I don't know if

-5-

1/9/92

anybody else would
money is involved.

share that.

I'm also concerned because a lot

of

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
All I can say, Bob, is that the
point you raised has been at the heart of this issue since time
immemorial.
There is only one solution to the problem that I know of
and that solution would be that the Federal Reserve should have a full
[unintelligible] and regulatory authority, something that the Federal
It is also
Reserve itself historically has never been crazy about.
something that as a practical matter would be extremely difficult to
achieve in political terms, even if we thought it was the right
solution.
Having said that, I do think this document at least goes
some way toward distancing us from the problem that you've described.
As far as information-sharing is concerned, we have already talked to
the SEC and they have agreed--and will agree I am told in writing--to
come up with a basic financial information [unintelligible] tell us
privately if they encounter a situation where one of the firms fell
I
out of compliance with whatever capital standards [unintelligible].
don't think there is at least within reach any perfect solution that
one can point to, but this does at least take some positive steps,
perhaps, in the direction of reducing the dilemma [unintelligible].
MR. FORRESTAL.

Okay, thanks very much.

MR. ANGELL.
Jerry, on page 5 you mentioned that the minimum
capital for new [commercial bank] primary dealers would be $100
million of Tier I capital and then you suggest $50 million for
Why the distinction?
registered broker-dealers.
Simply that we are trying to produce
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
a more or less equivalent result and it fundamentally reflects the
fact that the absolute level of capital in banks as opposed to brokerNone of these things is perfect, of
dealers is very different.
course, and [unintelligible] in trying to produce a roughly equivalent
effect in terms of the minimum standards [unintelligible].
Jerry, on page 6 you mention that of necessity,
MR. ANGELL.
at least for the time being, the number of additional primary dealers
And yet the document doesn't seem to make
will be relatively limited.
a distinction between the pre-automation era and the post-automation
I think you correctly point out on page 6 that for the time
era.
being it will probably be impossible to [allow everyone], who wanted
But did you have in
to, to step up and be in contact with the Desk.
mind that this could possibly change in the post-automation era?
I guess I thought the language we
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
There
used did that; maybe it needs to be made a little more clear.
"Following the
is a sentence at the bottom of page 6 which says:
implementation of automated communications for trading purposes,
further expansion in the number of primary dealers will be feasible."
But, again, maybe we
There was a similar sentence in the summary.
need to give that a little more attention.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, on the top

of page 4,

it is mentioned that

it is contemplated that each dealer firm's performance will be
evaluated annually beginning in June 1993, which gives the impression
that you're going into the post-automation era.

1/9/92

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That reference on page 4, of course,
The reference on page 4 is
is for a completely different purpose.
designed to deal with the case of a firm's [designation as a primary
dealer being discontinued] if it has a relationship with us and
If you have that relationship
doesn't use it.
It's intended to say:
and you do not make reasonable markets and your relationship with us
is for strictly business reasons, we will stop dealing with you. This
So, the
is precisely the way any firm would operate [unintelligible].
context there is quite different.
MR. ANGELL. Well, as you know, in regard to the conversation
at the Board, I'm somewhat concerned about the "franchise value" of
the primary dealer status.
And it seems to me that you've only
eliminated one of the factors that tends to give franchise value, and
that's the exam surveillance part of it.
Don't you think that when
you limit the number you give "scarcity value" or franchise value?
And don't you think that access to the Desk and that information gives
franchise value?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I don't think so.
I think the other
thing that is eliminated that's very important is the one you cited.
And, as we said before, [after the implementation of automation] we
will add new dealers as quickly as is humanly possible and as quickly
as they show themselves to be interested.
But until that automation
is finished, there clearly is a finite number, which itself may
change, but we can't deal with [unintelligible].
MR. ANGELL. Well, Jerry, I certainly agree with that. And
it would help the document from my perspective if it clearly indicated
that in this transition period we will be taking the first steps. But
then after the automation [is completed] it seems to me that we should
give some indication that the arrangements might be somewhat
different.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let me see if we can fool around
with the language.
I'll have Peter and Don see if they can come up
with something that will be a little more responsive to this point.
MR. ANGELL.

Thank you, Jerry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Jerry?

MR. MELZER. Alan, this is Tom Melzer. Just a couple of
comments quickly, Jerry.
[With respect to the elimination of the
requirement that a dealer maintain a one percent share of the total
customer activity reported by all primary dealers]:
One thing that
one percent did was to make sure that the Desk was dealing with firms
who were legitimately making markets; and it sort of prohibited
speculators from becoming primary dealers.
I understand the franchise
value, particularly with respect to access to brokers and so forth.
It's quite a bit different than this.
But my presumption is that [the
proposed] requirement that they make good markets in your view is
sufficient to make sure that you don't end up in some sense being
required to do business with a speculator. None of the things is
contingent on that, but that concerned me a little when I read this.
One other comment:
On page 4 where you talk about evaluating
their market-making performance and in the second sentence get into

1/9/92

the various conditions they need to meet:
additive.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I'm not sure I'd make those

A good point.

MR. MELZER. The way it reads now, they would have to default
on all of those things.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I see your point. Your comment in
juxtaposition with others clearly illustrates the balancing act that I
referred to.
MR. MELZER. Yes.
It could be embarrassing to us if we ended
up with a business relationship with a firm that is simply speculating
in government securities.
That's my point on this.

too.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It has been a big worry of mine,
I think your point is well taken.

MR. LAWARE.
I just have a couple of comments and I hope they
don't sound too nit-picking. We've talked about seeking creditworthy
counterparties [yet] we've said we will discontinue dealer
surveillance. And then we say over on page 7:
"Should a firm's
capital position fall below these minimum standards" their trading
relationship may be suspended. How do we know what the financial
condition of the firm is on a day-to-day basis unless we are
conducting some form of surveillance that would enable us to be up to
date on what is going on?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. John, first of all, in the case of
banks, I think we do know. In the case of the SEC-registered firms, I
have spoken directly to Chairman Breeden on this point. I do have his
commitment that if they encountered a situation of the nature that
you've described, they would promptly--on that day--inform us of the
circumstances. But, again, it's not a perfect solution. And your
question is another illustration of this matter of doing the balancing
[unintelligible] the SEC will live up to the commitments that it
makes.
MR. LAWARE.
Okay. Back on page 3 you say new firms will be
added and then they will be expected to make reasonably good markets,
participate meaningfully, and meet standards in a meaningful way over
time.
I find those very difficult concepts to deal with. It seems to
me that the judgments then become so purely subjective that they lend
themselves to creating potential confusion. And what really worries
me is that we can say that if they don't measure up, evaluated against
those rather amorphous standards, we may suspend their primary dealer
status but that that would carry no implication whatsoever as to their
How
creditworthiness, financial strength, or managerial confidence.
do we differentiate between suspending them for that purpose and
suspending them because their capital has fallen below the standards
and they haven't been able to restructure?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, part of the answer to that,
John, is to introduce--and this is a bit earlier in that paragraph-this annual review of their performance relative to these admittedly
Of course, the
nebulous performance standards that you referred to.
presumption first of all is that a firm that gets into that position

1/9/92

would in most cases voluntarily withdraw. We've already had a fair
Second, to the extent that a firm did
amount of experience with that.
not voluntarily withdraw, the timing of our decision to remove them
coming in the context of what we know [unintelligible] annual review
is such that it would be distinguished in the marketplace from an
action that was taken because of capital position [unintelligible].
The other item that bothered me was that the
MR. LAWARE.
$100 million minimum Tier I capital implies a $2-1/2 billion
Is a $2-1/2 billion commercial bank the kind of
commercial bank.
institution we would want to have as a primary dealer?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
balancing act.

Well, there we go again:

It's a

I know you don't want it to sound as if it's
MR. LAWARE.
only for the big boys, but are we encouraging somebody to get in this
game who really doesn't belong in it and foreclosing the opportunity
to deny them entry?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I hear you. All I can say is, yes,
there obviously is an arbitrary element in that number. Yes, we are
mindful of the fact that in terms of where we tend to draw the line on
the actual size of the bank, there is a question whether a bank even
of that size can do transactions with us in sufficient size to be
compatible with our needs and the efficiency of the Fed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The trouble, unfortunately, is that once
we start to go down this road we are recreating a "franchise value"
question, which we are trying to work against, so that there is no
fundamental solution to this. My suspicion is that the Desk is going
And whether that question is
to learn a lot as this system evolves.
crucial is probably one that experience will answer.
MR. LAWARE.

That's all I have.

MR. SYRON. Jerry, this is Dick Syron. May I ask just one
question?
Following up on [unintelligible]:
I appreciate that an
It's an
extremely difficult high-wire balancing act is involved.
almost an impossible thing to do with the conflicting issue
[unintelligible] we're dealing with eliminating the franchise value,
which would seem to be there now. On the other hand, I'm just
wondering, Peter, what this report is likely to say, particularly on
this surveillance issue and from a franchise value perspective on who
What happens as the next step in this sequence of
gets to bid.
events?
Even though I think [this] is the appropriate thing to do, I
wonder whether people are going to be satisfied with [these
conditions].
And if further steps are to occur down the road, I
wonder what the implications of those might be in this joint study?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Dick, I think I can answer
that. The inter-agency study, just as this has, will probably in any
number of ways make the point that as the auction process and our
operations are automated, that itself will tend to change the
character of the market in important ways.
The inter-agency study,
for example, has a number of recommendations bearing on this whole
question of price dissemination and opening up electronic trading.
But I think the cumulative weight of all of those things clearly moves

1/9/92

in the direction of saying that whatever franchise value is left even
at this stage--and by the way it is clear that whatever it was it's
going to be a lot less even as a result of these things--will
dissipate further when these changes are made, I think to zero, if not
to negative over time.
MR. SYRON. I think that's probably right.
I see two things
that may be worth emphasizing, if you can. One is the transitional
nature of these steps and, even if it isn't addressed specifically, it
will be clear to people that as we go to the electronic system with
open access, albeit with some constraints, it will really finish, as
you say, any residual franchise value.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I guess I should say that there is a
concern, at least until all the automation is finished and we all have
some experience with it--the Treasury in particular has a level of
anxiety on this point--about these new auction procedures and whether
they will work as well as we all hope. Having said that, I think the
cumulative weight clearly is in the direction of [unintelligible].
MR. SYRON. I agree with that. I'm just saying that I think
you ought to take credit for it being in that direction and, if the
transition is long clearly because of technical issues, this is the
most one can do in the circumstances.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions?

MS. PHILLIPS.
How many firms would likely come forward as a
result of this change in capital [standards]?
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's hard to say how many will come forward.
The potential universe with those capital standards I believe would be
about 75 broker-dealers and something on the order of 250 domestic
banks but also 100 and some foreign institutions.
The potential
number we're talking about is a few hundred but I don't think anything
like that number is going to come forward this year. It's a guess,
but if I were to make a stab, I'd say a few others might show their
faces within a month or two after we put this out.
That's just pure
guesswork.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions on this subject?
If not, do you want to go on with the Salomon Brothers issue, Jerry?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. First of all, by way of identifying
these multiple investigations of the Salomon Brothers situation
[unintelligible].
The point of view that has emerged over the last
couple of months, which is very much shared by the SEC, is that to the
extent feasible it is considered desirable to have several sanctions
[unintelligible] being taken in the specific context of the actions of
the SEC, although there may be [unintelligible].
Now, part of the
[desire] for doing that on a coordinated basis is the [unintelligible]
argument, trying to minimize the dangers of multiple shoes dropping at
multiple points in time with all of the uncertainties that go with
that. At the moment, it is still our intention to adhere to that
approach with the proviso that we have some further assurances from
the SEC that their determinations at least as they pertain to the firm
will be forthcoming in the not too distant future. There have been
multiple discussions both at the staff level and with Chairman Breeden

1/9/92

-10-

on this point in recent weeks, and he is supposedly coming back to me
within the next couple of days in another meeting regarding where he
thinks they are in terms of the completion of that process.
If it
seems reasonable to conclude that he is nearing the end of the road as
it pertains to the firm, then I think we would be very much inclined
to act in coordination with the SEC.
If on the other hand, that
possibility is either remote or not even within reach, then I think we
would have to reconsider the question of whether we [wait] or just go
ahead notwithstanding the legitimate [unintelligible].
Clearly, the
coordinating approach [is more desirable if] he can provide some
reasonable assurances that they are near the end of the process with
respect to the firm in those circumstances.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions?

If not, thank you very much,

Jerry.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. May I just conclude with one point,
Mr. Chairman?
I know it's
not necessary but I'll do it anyway.
I
would emphasize that this document obviously is still extremely
confidential.
I'm sure there will be some further wiggling here and
there between now and January 22nd.
Some it will be aimed at the
comments that were made today, which I fully endorse.
So, I would
emphasize that the document should be treated very, very carefully.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
adjourned.

Okay.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

With that, the meeting is

Thank you all.

END OF SESSION

