Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 19, 1992

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Tuesday, May 19, 1992, at 9:00 a.m.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Hoenig
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Melzer
Mullins
Phillips
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of.Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
Mr. Prell, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,
Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and Stockton,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

-2Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Lang, Ms. Lovett, Messrs.
Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
San Francisco, Richmond, Philadelphia, New York,
Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston
Mr. Thornton, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee of
May 19, 1992
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone.
like to start us off by approving the minutes?
SPEAKER(?).

Would somebody

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
would you start off please?

Without objection.

Bill McDonough,

MR. MCDONOUGH. Good morning, Mr. Chairman, ladies,
gentlemen.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think it's apparent that we're moving
in the direction that the Committee very strongly urged in the last
year or two.
My own personal impression is that we should move in the
direction in which [Bundesbank Vice President] Tietmeyer is suggesting
with regard to selling U.S. holdings of marks. The second question
that you raised, namely the balance of what we have in our portfolio,
is really quite important to address because I get the impression-indeed, I'm sure--that no coherent mechanism was employed in
accumulating these foreign balances in a manner that was in any way
related to what was a rational portfolio for long-term intervention
purposes. Now that we're finally getting to the point where we're
slimming down toward a reasonable aggregative level, it's probably
wise to put back on the table what in fact should be the long-term-both strategic and tactical--position of the Foreign Desk. And I
think it might be useful to have some recommendations coming from you
in that regard.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

Certainly.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I open up the meeting to questions with
the specific hope that each member will use the occasion to indicate
whether he or she is still on board with the position that we have
taken to streamline significantly the aggregative holdings that we had
as of a year or two ago.
Who would like to start off?
MR. SYRON. I think there's an opportunity to move further in
the direction that we want to go, and I concur that once we're closer
to where we want to be it will be worth thinking [more precisely]
about what that position should be.
MR. KELLEY.

I concur with Mr. Syron.

MR. ANGELL. I not only concur, but I really want to express
appreciation for Bill McDonough's capturing the spirit of the Board
and the FOMC position and very well representing that.
It's very
comforting to me to know the direction we're going, and I've had time
to worry about other things!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Does anybody have any questions?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I have no problem with the broad
direction we're going, and I completely agree with the point on the
structure of the balances. But I have to say on the D-mark balance
itself that if I extrapolate out this next $10 billion, I do have a

5/19/92

nagging sense of uneasiness that we might be getting to the point
where there's some danger of being too thin.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We still have $20 billion DM.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Not after the next
i.e. the further sales proposed by Tietmeyer.

[transaction],

MR. MCDONOUGH. It would leave about $14.7 billion equivalent
in DM after the next transaction, which would be about 24 billion
deutschemarks.
MR. TRUMAN. Bill is using dollar equivalent figures and
combined Treasury/Federal Reserve figures.
That's at current exchange
rates.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I make this observation knowing, and
I think broadly sharing, the sentiment of the Committee.
There
probably are only a few of us who were around in the late '70s when we
had to approach the world hat in hand [to obtain needed foreign
currency balances], and that was a very uncomfortable feeling. I
would not like to find us in that position again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
block of holdings.

Well, I think we still have a very large

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I agree with what you're saying.
just want introduce a little element of caution, that's all.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I

Caution noted.

MR. MULLINS.
It's worthwhile for us to give some thought as
to what is the appropriate balance, where we should start and stop,
and how far we should go.
I know that's difficult, but as we move
forward I think that's something that we should start to confront.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I agree fully. I've never had very
much sympathy for intervention, but I do remember the days that Jerry
has alluded to when we had to draw on the swaps to get money to
support the dollar. And if we are going to continue [to intervene],
which I hope we won't, our holdings could come in useful, as he says.
But I have never been sympathetic toward intervention and I'm glad
we're going in the direction we're going.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
opinion or raise a question?

Does anybody else want to express an

MR. JORDAN.
I'm new to the process and didn't participate in
your discussions before, but I like the direction. The desirable
level, I think, is so far below $20 billion deutschemarks that I'm
perfectly comfortable with getting down there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If there are no further comments, I
believe the content of what I just heard indicates that Bill ought to
go ahead and see whether or not he can formulate the appropriate
longer-term strategy. I guess the next meeting would not be an
inappropriate time to resurface this.
If there are no further

5/19/92

questions, I'll take a motion on ratifying--no, we don't have to
ratify anything. Let's move on to the Domestic Desk, Peter.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Peter?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, as you are generally
aware, I wanted to bring to the Committee's attention the fact that
the multiple investigations of the Salomon Brothers incident from last
summer may be coming to a head in the near future.
I say "may"
because this is a very complex matter and things could change even at
the eleventh hour.
I don't think I can characterize the bottom line
of that process except to say that a major effort is being made by all
of the official agencies--the U.S. Attorney, the Justice Department,
the SEC, the Treasury, and the Federal Reserve--to act in a way that
puts this unhappy event behind everybody in a coordinated fashion. As
I said, any number of things could change, including the most obvious
--the precise timing. But the specific issues of primary dealer
status and the status of Salomon's relationship to the Treasury in a
context of the bidding restrictions that they put on them last year
will be addressed as well. The intention is to try to address those
issues in a context that is consistent with the entirety of a
solution. Again, I can't characterize the likely bottom line, because
I still don't quite know what the pieces of that bottom line are, but
I thought it important that the Committee be broadly aware that it
seems likely, but by no means certain, that this could get put to bed
in the near future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions for Peter or

Jerry?
MR. LINDSEY. You have to help me with my memory on this. As
I recall from the last time this issue came up, if there was a felony
involved in this, a suspension is automatic, isn't it?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, first of all, Governor
Lindsey, in the new guidelines there is a reference to the fact that
if a firm pleads guilty or nolo contendere to a criminal charge, a
sanction would follow automatically. However, in Congressional
testimony we went to rather great lengths to say that that specific
provision would not necessarily apply ex post to the Salomon
situation. Therefore, even if a firm were not indicted for a criminal
charge, we still would have the flexibility to impose a sanction even
though that specific provision, which followed the event, is there.
But we were quite clear in saying that we did not feel that we were
necessarily bound by that in the context of the events of last August.
MR. LINDSEY.

Thank you for that information.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If there are no further questions, I
will entertain a motion to ratify the actions of the Domestic Desk
since the March meeting.
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is there a second?

5/19/92

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Without objection.

I'd like to make a recommendation on leeway
MR. STERNLIGHT.
for the next [intermeeting] period, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Sure, go ahead.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

We'll assume
Is there any objection?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the vote is in the affirmative. Let's move on to the economic
discussion.
MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Mr. Prell?

MR. PARRY. Mike, you went through some of the risks to the
forecast.
It seems to me that there are some areas where the economy
could turn out somewhat better.
Some of the work we've done suggests
that perhaps we could get greater strength in the residential sector.
It's conceivable that the dollar may end up being somewhat weaker than
was estimated in the forecast and then net exports would continue to
be somewhat better as well.
And the equipment area could be stronger.
And finally, inventories--though they are not likely to get back to a
traditional relationship--could perhaps not change as much as seems to
be implied in the forecast.
When you look at the risks, do you see a
real symmetry of risks in this forecast or do you think there might be
a predominance of risks on one side or the other?
What strikes me now
as opposed to the [forecast at the time of the] prior FOMC meeting is
that, at least in terms of visibility, there seem to be some upside
risks that weren't there before.
MR. PRELL. Well, we've felt that the balance of risks also
was more even in the last couple of forecasts than it had been through
much of last year. And I think we repeatedly flagged what we
perceived to be the asymmetry of the probability distribution through
last year. We are reasonably comfortable with this forecast as
presenting fairly balanced risks.
I think each of the items that you
mentioned is a plausible story. The one reservation I would have in
light of the recent data is that the latest housing market data are
disappointing relative to even our meager expectations.
We probably
had about as low a forecast for second-quarter housing starts as
anyone and yet the April figures--one month admittedly--do paint a
weaker picture.
MR. PARRY.

Although rates have come down.

MR. PRELL. Rates have come down and some observers sensed
that people were beginning to look at home buying as they would look
at car buying:
They had to feel there was a bargain. You know, the
government offered rebates early in the year and people rushed to buy.
We had not attached a lot of importance to that at the time, but in
retrospect it may have pulled forward some housing starts from later

5/19/92

in the year, or certainly some home sales.
where we are.

And we're not exactly sure

MR. PARRY.

So, you would say the risks still are relatively

MR. PRELL.

I think they're reasonably balanced here.

balanced?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mike, in reading the Greenbook, I concluded that
you thought the first-quarter GNP, or rather GDP--I haven't made that
transition completely--increased at a 3 percent rate.
Then in reading
the briefing papers last night, I thought at first you were going to
say 3.3 percent but then I looked at the chart and it appeared that it
might go as high as 4 percent. What is your best guess as to what
that figure really might be?
MR. PRELL.
Let me give you the arithmetic [to the extent]
that we are able to do these translations.
Every number that has come
in since the BEA's initial estimate has been higher than they had
anticipated, at least until the revision for the March housing starts,
which had only a small impact. If you cumulate those figures, you
come out at this point with about a 4 percent increase in GDP.
That's
assuming that the merchandise trade figure comes in right on their
assumption. It could be higher; it could be lower.
Our feeling was
that all these additional goods being sold might be tilting the risks
toward some lower [trade figure].
So, that's where we are, and I
think it's a fair statement at this juncture. Now, BEA will confront
the same anomalies that I noted, and they will have to take that into
account. They have some room to maneuver, but I think we should
expect a substantial revision.
MR. BLACK. That really would be something of a surprise to
the private economy if it were that much, wouldn't it?
MR. PRELL. Indeed.
It's looking backward, but I don't think
everyone has caught up with this. I see that a number of private
analysts have been talking in the last week or so about growth of
around 3 percent, and they will probably refine that a bit.
So, it's
unlikely to be a total shock, but it's coming in on the high side of
expectations, well on the high side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mike, in the forecast you have an implicit
decline in long nominal rates.
MR. PRELL.

Explicit decline!

MR. LINDSEY. Explicit decline, excuse me!
I forgot where it
was in the Greenbook. Yet long rates seem to [be stuck in] a trading
range; I think we all find them awfully stubborn. Suppose they stay
in the same trading range. How much risk is there to the forecast if
there is no decline over the next year in long rates?
MR. PRELL.
Well, I'm not sure how one would define the
"recent" trading range. If you look at the period since early

5/19/92

February until recently, I think we're pressing against the lower
limits [of that range] this morning, and we could conceivably break
below that.
Looking at the broader time frame going back, with bond
yields having gotten down to about 7-3/8 percent, that's about the
dimension of the decline that we're anticipating in our forecast by
early next year.
I think the answer to your question depends on what
circumstances bring about this failure [of long rates to decline].
If
it is a buoyant economy and strong demands for capital, then obviously
it's not a problem. If it is higher inflation expectations, we get
into some more complex issues about how that might affect the
affordability of housing and so on; but if it's inflation expectations
and not real rates, again it may not be a compelling negative.
If
it's risk premia brought on by political uncertainties--and this may
be a year of tremendous political uncertainty--or just the wrong
expectations, as we've had on some occasions, that could be a
negative. So it's really hard to say ex ante.
MR. JORDAN.

May I follow up on that question?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure, go ahead.

MR. JORDAN.
In the Greenbook, Part 2, on page III-3 you list
the indirect effects of Larry's question.
You say "velocity rose
further despite declines in opportunity costs. Recent weakness in M2
occurred in the face of still small opportunity costs."
You refer to
a chart and so on.
But then I flip over to page III-5 in the
paragraph at the top of the page where it says "the lack of aggressive
pricing for these deposits evidently has encouraged investors to move
from retail CDs into stock and bond mutual funds in order to take
advantage of higher anticipated returns."
That says, at least for
some components of M2, that the real opportunity cost is not the
short-term yield change in the chart on the prior page but rather
these longer-term yields and that those components of M2 are more like
investments instruments than they are like money instruments.
So,
that paragraph says that you've got the wrong opportunity cost, at
least for those components of money.
MR. KOHN. Well, I think that's right. There are several
Reserve Banks, including your own in particular, that have used other
opportunity costs that took into account the intermediate- and longerterm time deposit rates.
And that does a little better. Although it
doesn't pick up all the unexplained shortfall in money, it does help
to explain it to some extent.
Now, it has always been the case that
the division between money and investment assets--particularly for
money after deregulation and after Reg Q was taken off NOW accounts-is very hard to see.
It's hard to draw a bright line between
something you would call money and something you would call investment
assets. Other checkable deposits, NOW accounts, have elements of
investment assets; people hold them because of rate expectations.
So,
that has always been a somewhat fuzzy picture.
I agree that our
measurement of opportunity costs probably could be improved.
I think
one issue here is what that is telling us when banks aren't competing
for these intermediate- and longer-term CDs.
It's telling us in part
that they don't see loan demand; they don't intend to make a lot of
loans out in the future. Then we have to go back and ask whether that
means something:
whether it is just a relatively benign redirection
of credit flows or whether it is saying something about the
intermediation process that could feed back on aggregate demand.
So,

5/19/92

I agree with your point on opportunity costs; but once you cut below
that point, it still leaves a lot of ambiguity about the meaning of
the slowdown in money.
MR. JORDAN.
But the reason for asking comes back to what
Mike was saying [about whether] what the Greenbook says this month is
right. The Greenbook says long bond yields have come down because of
lower inflation; Mike termed that very appropriately [unintelligible]
very hopeful outlook for 1993.
I'd like to believe it.
But the
question was:
What are the risks to the forecast?
Can you connect up
what is going on with these components of money and [say that] part of
this optimistic outlook on inflation reflects the economy or is there
something a little stronger than that to tie it to? Part of it, I
assume, is also because of slow growth of M2.
Given this reason for
slow growth of M2, how comfortable can you be with that?
MR. PRELL.
Well, let me just say that I think we noted in
the last Greenbook, not this one, that we didn't find the narrower
monetary aggregates nor the enhanced narrow monetary aggregate that
you're implicitly describing as providing strong evidence on the
outlook. Historically, we haven't found that these provide all that
much better guidance than M2 as it is, with all of what I view as
flaws in the logic of its construction. But I'd also argue that in
telling the story about how money affects inflation, there's a shortrun transmission mechanism which I think would run through the
pressures of aggregate demand on aggregate supply. Thus, I think our
assessment of the pressures in resource markets is very relevant to
the short-run outlook for inflation through 1993.
So, I can segment
these questions to some extent.
MR. JORDAN.

With symmetric risks?

MR. PRELL. Well, I guess I'm skeptical about the meaning of
the monetary aggregates right now. I'm not inclined to assign a large
asymmetry to the risk just because the monetary aggregates have been
running low. Clearly, that's a judgment call.
Others have differed,
and perhaps wisely, in looking at the progress of this recovery. But
one also needs to interpret why the aggregates are behaving the way
they are and whether it is demand shifts or changes in the structure
of intermediation and so on that may be neutral in terms of their
implications for the cost and availability of credit to support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mike, I have two questions, which are somewhat
technical in.nature, dealing with historical [precedent] in data
series.
One is that just in talking to people and getting anecdotal
information on the housing market, [that information] is consistent
unfortunately with the pattern of data that was announced this
morning. What I was wondering is whether there is any evidence of
increased sensitivity to mortgage rate changes in housing and how that
fits in.
I remember in one of your earlier nonfinancial reports that
you talked about almost a change in the relationship between prices
and purchases. That is, as prices stopped declining in some markets,
there was a hypothesis at least that people were more willing to buy
because they were less concerned about the [potential] loss, which was
a different sign on price than we thought.

5/19/92

I have a second question, but I wanted to get to that one
first to ask how this fits in with our historical experience and
whether there has been a change in habits.
MR. PRELL. Well, as a general matter, we would perceive the
interest sensitivity of the housing sector as being reduced from what
it once was, in part because of reduced market segmentation--the
elimination of the non-price rationing effects that occurred a couple
of decades ago when rates moved above Reg Q ceilings and we got
disintermediation. The introduction of ARMs might work in the same
direction, but how important that is isn't clear. There's a question
Some people have been able through considerable
on mortgage rates.
effort to tease out of econometric equations some suggestion that
people will wait until the rates have come down and they don't think
rates are going to go down any further before they will move. But
that is a very short-run phenomenon and it doesn't seem to be a very
important result over significant spans of time.
On the price side, it depends on which model you think is
most relevant.
There's an affordability model, which clearly does
have some importance. That looks at mortgage rates and prices and at
that combination relative to income; and that says that we have had a
considerable improvement in affordability over the past couple of
On the other side, if you look at an investment model, a useryears.
cost model, it says that it's cheaper to own a home when you're
getting capital gains.
So expected price movements would be important
in that model.
Basically we've taken a middle-ground view saying
affordability is better and the fear that people will be losing their
shirts in owning a home is probably abating because house prices
generally have firmed some over the past year.
It's a hard call to
make as to which of these things is most important.
I think what
we've seen recently, as I was suggesting, is that people are very
sensitive to a number of aspects of this.
They jumped when they saw
those mortgage rates get down to low levels and when there was the
They seemed to have pulled
first-time home buyer credit [proposal].
back very sharply when rates backed up and the credit [proposal]
evaporated.
An environment in which people are still rather uncertain
about their employment and income prospects is a fragile situation.
And, going back to President Parry's comment, if we can begin to get,
without generating strength solely out of the housing sector, some
reasonable growth going here and some confidence in employment
prospects, then people may move in response to this vastly improved
affordability, and we could get a significantly stronger housing
expansion than we have forecast. We're certainly operating at low
levels even given the prevailing demographic trends.
MR. SYRON. For what it's worth, I think your analysis is
probably correct and that we don't necessarily get symmetric behavior.
But after we have a period of declining prices, the relative weight on
the investment side becomes somewhat more important.
The second question I'm trying to figure out is whether to
take much encouragement in the household data. I've always been
inclined to look more at the payroll data but I'm just wondering
whether we do have an historical precedent to some extent or if there
has been a shift there because of all of the restructuring that's
going on.
Again, one hears these anecdotal stories of many new
I just wanted to ask you if you could
smaller firms starting, etc.

5/19/92

explore that a bit more because we are seeing quite a diversion in
I'm grasping for encouragement
patterns [between the two series].
here if you can provide it.
MR. PRELL. Well, it's not bad news.
The question is how
much good news there is in these numbers. We've looked at the history
and a lot of other analysts have too.
Some have declared that there
is some lead, particularly in the early phases of an upturn, in the
household employment series relative to the payroll series. Others
have said that's just not a very robust relationship. We find hints,
but [the relationship] doesn't seem to be highly reliable. The fact
is that in the payroll series the Bureau of Labor statistics make an
allowance for new business formations as well as the closing down of
businesses. And it is a little murky how they do this.
It is
conceivable that they're underestimating the rate of new business
formations if the economy is picking up and that that is biasing the
change downward. But as I suggested, looking at corollary evidence
entirely separate from these things--such as initial claims and the
responses in the Conference Board surveys about job availability--all
these other things don't suggest that employment is growing at 300,000
plus a month.
[Actual growth] may be somewhere in between but I'm
more inclined to think it may be closer to the payroll trend at this
point than to the household trend.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mike, looking back at the chart on page III-3 on
M2 velocity:
Last fall some around here were quite concerned that M2
growth was quite a good indicator of where [the economy was] and yet
these first-quarter numbers I presume [raise] nominal [GNP growth] for
the first quarter up to somewhere between 6 and 7 percent. That makes
V-2, with a one-quarter lag, shoot up to 4 percent.
Doesn't that
really cast a lot of doubt on all that concern about slow M2 growth?
MR. PRELL. Well, as you know, I've not been an enthusiast of
that view and have worried that that was more a coincidence.
Typically, we have thought of there being a lag between changes in
money growth and changes in GDP.
So, the close timing last year I
think was not necessarily in line with what we normally consider the
relationship to be. Whether a one-quarter lag in velocity gets at
this or not is another question. I think we're looking at a period of
slow growth of money that stretches back a few years now. And in a
sense we haven't gotten some of the payoff [in] disinflation that some
If [the economy is] growing at the rate it
might have anticipated.
appears to be, that doesn't quite seem to fit.
But I don't want to
state the case excessively strongly either. There may have been a
message--and it may show up in the second quarter or the third
quarter--from that weakening money stock growth last year.
MR. KOHN. Governor Angell, I had some work done, drawing it
with the two-quarter lag that people like to use and assuming that the
Greenbook is close to right for GDP.
That also shows some pretty
sizable increases in velocity in the first half of the year, unlike
last year when velocity was a bit flatter.
So, after a while, as I'm
about to say in my briefing, I think there is some reason to believe
that the weakness in M2 we see this year is not sending us the same
kind of signal, whether it's coincidence or not, that it seemed to be
sending last year. But there is a question of confidence here.
The

5/19/92

-10-

weakness is extreme and even if the signal-to-noise ratio is very,
very low-I calculated the two-quarter lag also and had
MR. ANGELL.
the same conclusions.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's another way to come at this,
which yields much the same results, in the sense that we've got this
The
long-term trend, the P*, tracking the general price level.
existing pattern of P* at this stage is at virtually zero if not a
negative price level.
If one is going to presume on the basis of the
data that we are seeing a resistance to coming down under the 3
percent level or even that it is somewhat off the zero base, then the
question essentially is whether we are incorrectly measuring [M2] in
the same context.
Namely, if M2 is artificially deflated and [that]
created this particular zero [or slight] decline, we have the wrong
M2; we have the wrong proxy for money.
If we had the right proxy for
money, it would be growing much faster than the numbers we are looking
at; it would be much closer to the opportunity cost even in the
context that Jerry Jordan is raising the issue.
It would also mean
that P* is back on track with exactly where the equation numbers are.
So, it seems as though the financial system in a general way is more
in line with the real economic system, with the outlier essentially
being M2.
If we alter M2 everything else falls into place. It's a
disturbing consideration, but it sort of leads to the conclusion that
all of our theoretical judgments with respect to the effect of the RTC
on M2 have not been exactly correct and that there is a significant
element of technical erosion in the data as a consequence of the
liquidation of the small CDs and the thrifts.
There has been a fairly
significant reduction in the thrift area without a spillover--as we
all would have expected with the eliminations of the thrifts--from the
thrifts into the commercial banks and other depository institutions.
Governor LaWare.
MR. LAWARE.
Mike, I'm puzzled by the corporate profits
projection in the Greenbook.
It looks like fairly steady improvement
during 1992 and then it goes rather blah in 1993 with a fair amount of
swing back and forth from one quarter to another.
What is the
rationale behind that projection?
MR. PRELL. Well, without being too precise in this, we've
seen some evidence in the first quarter of a very big jump in profits.
A sizable move at this point wouldn't be surprising in terms of the
historical relations, which suggest an acceleration in output growth
that produces an acceleration in profits.
As things level out, as
productivity increases begin to move back toward trend, we get a
little additional pressure on the profit margins even though the rate
of compensation increases is diminishing. And thus we get this
leveling out of the profit share and in the pattern we see for total
corporate profits.
It may be that profits should be trending up a bit
more. That certainly would be more consistent with the view that I
think prevails among private analysts, which has consumer price
inflation stabilizing or increasing in 1993.
Those people tend to see
continuing upward movement in corporate profits.
MR. LAWARE.
The stock market would seem to indicate that
that's the view on the whole.

5/19/92

-11-

MR. PRELL.
I think it's very difficult to read what the
stock market is building in here. But looking at this year's profit
forecasts, recognizing that the PE ratios are distorted by
extraordinary factors in 1991 that may be unwinding in 1993, we can
see a movement of PEs at current stock price levels back into the high
teens, still at a high level historically. But later on this year
things will not look as out of line as they do now. And if interest
rates are stable or coming down, this all hangs together fairly
plausibly.
It's on the high side of history but plausible.
I sense
the market probably is taking a view that with expansion come firmer
prices and that profits will be a bit better in 1993 than we forecast.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you.

MR. HOENIG. Mike, just to follow up on your comment on
inventories:
You say that in the revised first-quarter numbers
inventories are playing a more important role but that should not have
an adverse effect going forward. That is what I think I heard you
saying. Can you go through that again as to why we would not have
some repercussions from that?
MR. PRELL. Well, the repercussion is that had we ended up
with the level of sales we are running at with lower inventories as
per the initial estimate, that would have been a bullish factor for
the economic outlook. As it is, though, we don't see that there is a
gross inventory imbalance coming out of the first quarter except for
the wholesalers. And in fact in the nondurable wholesale area there
are not very many signs of inventory/sales ratios being high.
Our
expectation is, though, that inventories are going to be managed very
cautiously and that quite possibly wholesale inventories will run off
some. Manufacturers show no inclination to see their inventories
rise. We expect to see some runoff of inventories for a little while
longer but at a lower rate than even the reduced pace that we think
the first quarter produced.
So that means that inventory investment
makes a small positive contribution in the second quarter in our
forecast and a considerably greater contribution in the second half of
the year as we see a swing to a mild rate of accumulation as sales
trends continue positive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions?
If not, let's
move on to the Committee discussion. Let me make a request to those
of you who have any insights into the commercial real estate area to
put them on the table. Very specifically, I think it would be useful
to know if there are any indications of a pickup in commercial real
estate transactions, [because] what we have been looking at is a
decline in offerings and appraisals. And until we see the bids coming
in, we will be getting no indication of any stability. Obviously, as
the bids begin to move in, that will engender transactions and it may
be a far clearer signal that we're getting closer to the bottom of
[the decline in that sector] than any rather dubious price index for
commercial real estate.
So, for those of you who have any sense of
this, it would be useful for the Committee to get a better view of an
area that has been crucial to us and for which our data sources have
been less than correct. Who would like to start off?
Jerry.
MR. JORDAN. To comment exactly on that point, the commercial
bank I was with conducted eight auctions before I left. They were all
in the Southwest and on the West Coast. But the process was:
Once we

-12-

5/19/92

did the first auction and generated the interest that there is a
market out there, each one went better than expected and better than
the prior one because it was clear that there was a core market left;
[we started] in Texas and then we went over to Arizona, Nevada, Utah,
and Colorado.
It appeared to us that there were a lot of people who
had been waiting for the bottom, figuring that this was going to be
the buy of the century in commercial real estate, in particular.
Some
of it was raw land but most of it was in structures. As they saw each
successive auction going better, with greater interest than the prior
one, they became concerned that they had missed the low point and it
tended to feed on itself with great success.
MR. KELLEY.

What is the time frame you're talking about,

Jerry?
MR. JORDAN. The first one was about 18 months ago, and then
about 4 months elapsed before we tried the second one. And from that
point it picked up in pace.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Jerry, would you like to comment on your
general view on the District while you have the floor?
MR. JORDAN. Well, just over the last 10 weeks the sense
around the Fourth District is that things are definitely improving.
The comments from all parts of the District have been of a uniformly
upbeat nature.
The negative tones come in on the lack of robustness-not on the direction but the vigor--and still with expressions of
concern about the durability or sustainability of the expansion.
There are frequent references by full-time directors and members of
our small business advisory and small banker advisory councils to
having been disappointed last year when they thought the recovery was
under way, and they are concerned now that we could have another false
start. Most of the durable goods manufacturers, especially the
capital goods firms that have the ability to export, are experiencing
very strong order books.
Some are exporting to Canada and some to
Europe with some surprise at the strength, especially in Germany, in
their capital goods [orders].
A number are expressing pleasure at
having recaptured domestic markets, especially those in the auto
sector who now are able to start selling to Japanese transplant
companies and finding success against foreign competition in that
area.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the staff forecast has changed
We thought it was a good
really just a little since the last time.
forecast then, and it still seems to be a reasonable forecast to us.
Certainly, most of the anecdotal and other information that we are
getting in the Fifth District and also in the country as a whole is
consistent with this relatively moderate rate of recovery that the
staff is projecting.
On the point regarding commercial real estate transactions,
our Vice Chairman is a big real estate operator. He does a large
volume of business and also is a solvent real estate developer, which
makes him an unusual breed. He has been reporting for about two
months now that commercial real estate is beginning to move.
Nothing
new is being built, but it is beginning to move; the prices had

5/19/92

-13-

dropped to the point that they looked attractive.
He also always adds
"and there's plenty of financing out there for it."
This was not true
a while back, but that's the way he has seen it for some two months.
And I think that's a pretty [reliable] reading because his firm
operates in a lot of cities throughout the country.
It's certainly true that both manufacturing activity and
retail sales did appear to have decelerated a bit since we had the
gains earlier in the year. Nevertheless, most of our contacts believe
that the recovery is here to stay this time. That view was universal
at our last board meeting, for example.
And for the most part they
expect their own businesses and industries to grow at a solid, if
something less than spectacular, rate over the months ahead. These
contacts cite a wide variety of leading indicators; they all seem to
have their favorites, and those range from increasing trucking
activity to reduced loan delinquencies to rising telephone hookups,
and on and on.
Even though I think the staff forecast is reasonable, it's
certainly true that reasonable forecasts don't always come true.
So
we have to ask, as we always should, where the risk lies. And I think
the risk of errors may be on the down side.
I'm bothered by this
sharp deceleration in the rate of growth in M2, although I think your
explanation comes very close to explaining why it has misbehaved, and
I'm very sympathetic to that.
The apparent continued sluggishness in
May is obviously a further risk on the down side, and it's a risk I
worry about a great deal.
Still, I believe we can be fairly certain
that the weakness that we had results from these special factors such
as the lower non-withheld personal income tax payments and the
movement into other kinds of assets, this substitution for M2-type
balances.
My 85 year old mother-in-law, for example, is now out in
the longer end of the market and that is something I never thought
would take place! And I think we'll be better able to gauge-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

She's holding until maturity?

MR. BLACK. Well, if we get the lower interest rates that the
staff has projected she might take capital gains on that! Anyway, I
think to be better able to read the significance of M2 we have to get
a little further past April and the tax date.
Now, on the other side, I think it's worth noting that the
main differences between the staff forecast and most other forecasts
is that the staff expects inflation to decline further this year and
then hold steady next year. Many of the other forecasters think
inflation is going to bottom out this year and is going to be higher
The staff is also projecting, as I just
in the next few years.
mentioned, lower long-term interest rates over the period ahead and it
seems as if most other forecasters expect interest rates to continue
on an uptrend.
I see the Greenbook projection as more desirable, and
it is certainly plausible. But I believe the chances of achieving
this are going to depend pretty highly on whether or not we make the
right policy calls in the critical months ahead.
In particular, I
think we have to convince the markets and the public that we are still
determined to reduce inflation further even as we try to foster this
budding recovery we apparently have under way.
The credibility of our
long-term strategy is at a very crucial point right now and it's
really on the line.
So, I think we need to do all we can to reinforce

-14-

5/19/92

this commitment that I think all of us in this room share to working
inflation down over the longer run.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Twelfth District
economy is experiencing varied signals, with weakness in California
offset by modest growth in other District states.
In California,
there is some improvement in the north, with continued problems in the
I guess that latter comment is something
southern part of the state.
of an understatement. The five-county Los Angeles area accounts for
50 percent of state employment and it also accounts for 80 percent of
the 550,000 jobs in the state that were lost between May 1990 and
So, it's clear that not only is there weakness in the
March 1992.
state but it is highly concentrated in the southern part of the state.
The riots in Los Angeles are estimated to have cost $1 billion in
total property damage and to have resulted in additional job losses of
around 25,000.
Now, I have seen estimates as high as 40,000, and that
may be referring to a peak that endured for just the number of days
immediately following the riots.
But the number that we're going with
is 25,000; and expectations are that in a number of weeks that could
fall below 10,000 as some buildings are repaired and some stores are
restocked, because some stores were just looted and not seriously
damaged.
There is also obviously further concern about the effects of
the riots on tourism and firm location decisions. And while I'm still
talking about Los Angeles, I don't think I can give you any of those
glimmers of hope with regard to commercial real estate.
Last year 9
million square feet of office space was added in the Los Angeles area.
It caused vacancy rates to shoot up quite a bit; it depressed lease
rates and property values; and projects under way indicate that the
problem is going to get somewhat worse before it gets better.
So, I
have not been able to pick up any improvements, at least in the Los
Angeles area.
I would agree with what Jerry Jordan says in terms of
some other areas in the District.
We even picked up a few optimistic
comments coming from some people in the state of Washington where
there also was a fairly serious condition of over-building as well.
For the state [of California] as a whole, indicators of
economic activity are mixed.
Existing home sales reports indicate a
modest rebound; payroll employment rose in April; and it appears as
though agricultural conditions are improving. However, manufacturing
employment continues to contract. And while construction employment
has risen for two consecutive months, nonresidential construction
awards and residential permits are below their year-earlier levels.
There is a very big issue that you may begin to read a bit
Reflecting recent economic weakness,
more about in the month ahead.
the state faces a severe shortfall of $10 to $12 billion through the
end of the next fiscal year. Not surprisingly, revenues have fallen
substantially below projections. The law in California requires that
they enter the new fiscal year with tax and spending plans to produce
a balanced budget.
And this is before July 1st.
There obviously are
some things that they can do that are of a rather tricky nature, but
in large part they have to find $10 to $12 billion of reduced spending
And that's not exactly the Keynesian approach to
or higher taxes.
dealing with California's problems.

5/19/92

-15-

Outside of California, District states have performed
relatively well over the recession, and they continue to show modest
growth. Construction activity is rising in several District states as
are home sales.
Cutbacks continue to be reported, unfortunately, in
aerospace, with job losses of 6,500 projected for Boeing this year.
I
should point out that Boeing employs over 100,000 in the Seattle area.
In addition, Boeing continues to have a large backlog of orders and
actually has a very strong long-run forecast with growing demand from
the Pacific and Asian region. Contacts that we have in nondefense
manufacturing report a modest rebound, with lumber and wood products
manufacturing currently bottoming out, and that was a considerable
source of weakness in the past year.
If I may turn briefly to the national scene, incoming data
since our last meeting seem to add to confidence that a moderate
recovery is under way. Indeed, as I [noted] in my discussion with
Mike, it's not difficult to come up with an outlook that is a bit
stronger than is indicated in the Greenbook. For example, our
analysis points to somewhat greater strength in inventory investment,
residential construction, and net exports.
And we end up with a
growth rate over the next year and a half of a little over 3 percent
compared to the Greenbook expectation of 2-3/4 percent.
I agree with
the Greenbook that inflation is on a very slow downward trend, but I
fear that such slow progress will make others question the resolve of
the Fed to deal with inflation longer term. It seems to me that we
might be at a point soon where we'll have to be more forthcoming about
our inflation objectives.
And probably we can't do that until 1993.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, in the Sixth District,
conditions clearly have continued to improve. The business people I
have spoken to over the last several weeks are much more upbeat than
they were and they have more confidence that the recovery is going to
be sustainable.
I hear much less talk about a stalling of the economy
or a double or triple dip, whatever you want to call it.
There also,
I think, is a recognition among business people recently that the
recovery is going to be modest. They are no longer looking for that
historical type of recovery that we've had.
We've had gains in a number of areas in the District--retail
sales among them, especially in apparel.
And that's in spite of the
fact that we had a late Easter and some bad weather. Auto sales have
also been relatively good, as have other durables, particularly those
related to housing. Home sales have been fairly decent also and that
has reduced [housing] inventories and led to greater growth in housing
permits.
Capital spending is projected to be fairly modest, but
manufacturers are reporting that orders and shipments are turning up.
A couple of other areas that are important to us are tourism and
[convention] business, and we see gains in both of those areas.
On the commercial construction question that you asked,
anecdotally I've been hearing from people that commercial construction
perhaps is at the low point.
I can say that commercial space is much
less of a drag than it has been. We've had some absorption of space
and that is beginning to stabilize lease prices. And that's pretty
much [the case] around the District's major cities.
On the price

-16-

5/19/92

side, prices for finished goods are holding relatively steady, and in
other industries we see stable input prices and no pressure on wages.
The two geographical areas that are dragging a little are Florida and
Florida is suffering from reductions in defense spending
Louisiana.
particularly, as well as the lower interest rates that are affecting
I guess there are a lot of mothers-inthe high number of retirees.
law in Florida!
MR. BLACK.

Tell them to go long!

MR. FORRESTAL. Louisiana continues to suffer as a result of
the energy situation. So, with respect to the District, Mr. Chairman,
things are looking relatively good and more sustainable, as I said,
than they had been.
With respect to the national picture, the Greenbook forecast
is quite a reasonable one and, in fact, I would be very happy if we
could achieve it, especially on the inflation side. Our forecast is
about the same as the Greenbook in terms of GDP but we see somewhat
lower unemployment and higher inflation.
I think the difference is
basically that productivity gains [are lower] and labor costs are
higher in our forecast than in the Greenbook. I do think the
The efforts we see on the part of
expansion is likely to endure.
people to get their balance sheets in order lay the foundation for a
more sustainable expansion but, of course, we haven't seen the full
effects of that, and I guess that leads to some questions about the
I was prepared to mention that but Mike did a
risks to the forecast.
very good job of detailing those risks in the forecast, so I won't go
over that again.
I would say with respect to the slow growth of M2 that a lot
of this, if not all of it, we hear is principally the run-off of small
time deposits.
Banks are not bidding very aggressively for funds in
this current environment and that suggests the process of financial
disintermediation is still constraining. Putting all of this
together, it seems to me that the risks in the forecast are more
evenly balanced than they were. They are more symmetrical, and that
suggests to me that we don't need a change in policy at the moment.
I
continue to be concerned about the outlook for inflation. Maybe
participants in the market are wrong, but it seems to me that the
yield curve is telling us something about future prices that we need
to take into account. The price numbers themselves are somewhat
disappointing and we don't know at this point whether we are looking
at a temporary blip or whether we are on a trajectory toward a higher
level of prices.
So, I think as we approach the policy discussion we
should move very, very cautiously.
Thank you.
MR. STERN. With regard to the District, the modest but
steady progress that has been in place for quite some time continues,
and I won't go into details except that there are a few concerns
around. One is in agriculture where, of course, this time of year
moisture is always the major uncertainty, and that is the issue in
some parts of the District.
Beyond that, there is some concern in the
timber industry where environmental issues are limiting activity, and
we've seen some marginal mining operations go out of business. But
otherwise the District economy is in pretty good shape, I think.
Attitudes are also in pretty good shape.

5/19/92

-17-

With regard to the national economy, my views do not differ
from most that have been expressed so far. As Mike Prell indicated,
if anything, we've done at least as well or better really than we
thought we would over the last couple of quarters.
That [improvement]
does seem in my judgment to be continuing; I'm referring to the real
side, and I don't see any reason at this juncture for renewed or
additional concern in terms of real activity. The disappointment, to
the extent there has been some, has been on the inflation side, at
least as measured by consumer prices or the employment cost index. In
talking to business people in the District, for the most part they
continue to describe a very competitive environment and they don't
give any impression that it's easy to raise prices or pass along cost
increases or whatever. But it's a little hard to know in light of all
the data whether they simply mean by all this that they can live with
3 or 4 percent inflation and thus that's what they mean by a very
competitive environment.
It's just hard to know what they have in
mind as they describe that situation.
With regard to commercial real estate, the situation is quite
mixed as best I can judge it.
I have heard of some renewed activity
in the construction of warehouse and manufacturing space; it's not a
lot, but there do seem to be some signs of life there. With regard to
office space, one of our directors, with whom you're familiar, has
been "bottom fishing" in terms of buying office space in various parts
of the country for a couple of years now. He also has bought some raw
I think he feels quite positive and
land in some locations.
comfortable about this. On the other hand, I do come across investors
and developers who tell me it's still difficult to find financing.
They're not talking about financing just for new projects but to
refinance or to purchase existing buildings; although when I express a
counter view and basically describe what one of our directors has
done, a number of people will admit that they've been doing that too.
It leads me to believe that perhaps there is a little more activity
around than we might appreciate, but perhaps it's a little
subterranean. Olympia and York has not been a topic of conversation
in the Ninth District, but we have our own interesting situation:
The
so-called Mall of America, a mega mall, is nearing completion. The
first part of it is supposed to open in August and now that it's too
late there is growing concern about how successful it is going to be.
So, we'll just await developments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In terms of the
national economy, our forecast for growth this year is very consistent
with the staff forecast. We get there in slightly different ways.
Our consumption numbers are a bit lower.
I think the differences in
durables probably relate to the fact that our housing numbers are a
little lower than those in the staff forecast but, offsetting that,
our export numbers are a bit stronger. There is a difference, though,
in the outlook for inflation. Our numbers are more constructive than
the staff forecast. We expect in terms of the CPI that we would be
getting down to the 3 percent area by the end of this year and then
perhaps see continued improvement next year.
With regard to the District, there seems to be slow but
steady improvement in the major segments of our economy.
But I must
say the magnitude of the improvement between this meeting and the last

5/19/92

-18-

meeting is not quite as great as was the case at the time of the last
meeting.
In that prior period there had been pretty good improvement.
In fact, in some cases there are signs of moderation appearing. As an
example of this, our housing activity is down a bit but from very high
Seasonal factors had a big effect on January and February
levels.
housing activity. Also, that was a period in which mortgage rates had
come down quite substantially and that gave housing in the Midwest a
Retail activity
push; but we're now seeing some softness in housing.
also has slowed a bit; it is still positive compared to last year but
the momentum has slowed, again from a very rapid pace in both January
and February.
On the other hand, the manufacturing sector continues to show
slow but steady improvement.
Second-quarter production in the auto
industry is continuing to run well ahead of last year, but of course
the second quarter last year was comparatively weak.
Third-quarter
schedules have been set a little higher than the third quarter of last
year, but the magnitude is not as great as the pace of the second
quarter.
Current dealer attitudes are good, I'm told. Their order
rate from manufacturers is very much in line with the production
schedules.
But I will say the dealer order rate is a bit ahead of the
retail sales level.
Still, the inventories out there don't seem to be
out of line, particularly for this time of the year.
I must say that
in this overall category I have heard from just everybody that the
demand for light trucks is very, very strong. The industry sales
forecasts are a little stronger than ours.
They are expecting a very
good third quarter and an even better fourth quarter.
So, there is
more to come on that. The heavy truck business continues to be better
than last year. The current order rate is running about 10 percent
ahead of last year, but of course that's an increase from a very low
level.
And heavy truck manufacturers are operating at about 70
percent of capacity. They are forecasting an improved sales level
this year of only about 119,000 units and that's versus a good year
of, say, 165,000 to 175,000 units. The steel business also is doing a
little better; orders, particularly for sheet, are coming in at good
levels.
That I think is reflective of the auto production schedules
and also a bit of strength on the appliance side.
The steel industry
is operating at about 83 percent of capacity. They're going to ship
40 million tons in the first half and are forecasting 42 million tons
for the second half, so it ought to be a good year in terms of the
I find
[tonnage] being shipped. But the pricing is just terrible.
this somewhat of a contradiction:
They're shipping a lot of metal but
they're just not making any money.
With regard to the real estate question that you asked about,
the firm I talked with feels that we may be getting to the point of
They are seeing some
stability but we still aren't there yet.
There's a
increased interest on the part of funds to buy real estate.
greater level of interest but not a significant volume [of sales] is
taking place.
They think we're going to have a continuation of price
declines this year, perhaps as much as 10 percent for the year as a
whole.
That's lower than in previous years, which again is indicative
that we're getting to a point of stability.
The vacancy rates in
Chicago are going to go up.
We have two or three big projects that
are still finishing up, so our already fairly high vacancy rates are
going to go up.
This firm does not anticipate a return to normal
vacancy levels until 1995 or 1996.

-19-

5/19/92

In the agricultural sector, we've had a very unusual planting
season.
It has been cold and wet in most of our area. But in one
week, the week of May 10th, some 50 percent of the corn acreage was
planted, which was pretty phenomenal.
However, given the carryover
stocks, which were fairly low, and the significant uncertainty with
regard to weather, our expectation is that it's going to be a year in
which prices are going to be very, very weather-related, but at least
we're off to a pretty good start.
I might say that the ag equipment
business is sour.
Contrary to earlier expectations, retail sales of
major agricultural implements have slowed significantly. It's down
As a consequence the
about 13 percent currently from last year.
production schedules, which had been set at a pretty conservative
level, now are being reduced.
With regard to inflation, I do think that the outlook is
increasingly constructive. Price increases are just not sticking.
In
the manufacturing sector, I continue to be impressed by the major
manufacturers who are continuing to get decreases in their prices for
purchased products or, if there are increases, they are pretty modest.
The same also is true in the retail sector.
People who supply the
major retail stores know that they just can't get price increases
So, I must say
through. The consumers in turn are very tough.
general attitudes in the District are that rising prices are just not
a major danger. Labor contracts continue to be negotiated under
favorable terms. Three-year contracts are the norm. The occasional
six-year contract in the paper industry and the wage increases under
these contracts are easily managed through productivity improvements.
After months of bitterness that I have commented on from time-to-time
When the company
here, the Caterpillar strike just went "poof."
threatened and then began to bring in replacement workers, the union
attitude just collapsed. They have not, of course, settled the
contract yet, but they're back at work. This won't necessarily set a
pattern for the UAW negotiations with the auto companies this fall,
but certainly it's going to have an effect on the tone as they go into
those discussions.
Net, while I think the economy is continuing to show signs of
slow but steady improvement, without more strength in some of the
major segments the question [of sustainability] has to be a
significant one. Therefore, as we see it, the risks in terms of
growth continue to be on the down side. And with the improved outlook
with regard to inflation, it seems to us that our policy response
should be geared to dealing with signs of deterioration in growth
should they begin to emerge. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I'd say the District is mixed. Manufacturing
has been up for several months running but there is some slowing in
the pace of advance.
In retailing, there just isn't much of a trend
either up or down; it seems to be fairly stuck. Residential
[construction] is growing but not robustly.
As to your commercial real estate question, I have the sense
that the District is either at or approaching the bottom of the hole
but that there is not much sign of a pickup.
The general [view] is
that this is a three-to-five year problem to work our way out of
before we get vacancy rates at the point that they will stimulate much

5/19/92

-20-

construction. The bankers, I think, feel that the worst surprises are
on the table; but the most optimistic feeling is that we may be at
about the bottom.
The bankers see some evidence of a pickup in loan demand,
although not much in the hard numbers; it's more at the inquiry stage.
Attitudes, in contrast to this mixed view of the real sector, are more
upbeat than the hard numbers would support underneath. There just is
a sense that things are going to move, and that's an improvement over
a couple of months ago.
But I suspect that this sentiment is not
firmly based and that one or two months of poor sales or shrinking
orders would change the attitudes. Nonetheless, I think the attitudes
are better.
For the national economy, I think we do have a moderate
recovery; if anything, it's faster than expected. And it's hard not
to feel better about the sustainability issue and feel that we have a
sustainable recovery. The money supply issue strikes me as one of
those things we can argue about day-in and day-out. We have some good
reasons not to worry about it, but it is a shadow that hangs over us.
I think the only way to settle it is not to worry about it as long as
it's an outlier and the economy picks up.
But if we start to see some
weakening in the real sector, then it's going to mean something.
It's
almost an agnostic approach in terms of how we should deal with it.
On the inflation side, my sense is, much as Si just
expressed, that it's awfully hard to see upward pressures in prices.
The other side of that is that, particularly in large cities, the
unemployment problem looks as if it's just stuck. There is an
attitude both from the business side as well as those people seeking
jobs that there just isn't going to be much improvement.
How all that
will play its way out through the warm summer months in these cities
is something that one has to be uneasy about.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Relatively speaking, the Eleventh District
economy remains one of the stronger District economies, at least in
terms of employment.
From the bottom of the recession in April of
1991, employment has grown about 1-1/2 percent in our District.
Within the District the weakest, and the declining, sector is energy
and the main source of strength is exports, especially exports to
Mexico, which account for a third of Texas exports to foreign
countries.
Between 1990 and 1991, Texas exports to Mexico were up
16-1/2 percent; and exports to Canada, which is our second largest
The number
internationaltrading partner, were up almost 8 percent.
of businesses requesting information on assistance with exporting from
the international marketing division of the Texas Department of
Commerce was as great through April as they had expected for the
So, there's a lot of activity gearing up for the
entire year.
prospective North American Free Trade Agreement, which is very
important to our part of the country. And given the present economic
environment and political climate, freer trade--even though we would
all agree that it's desirable--is becoming a harder sell politically.
That's not so much true in our area because our business people expect
to benefit disproportionately from NAFTA, but I hope that all of you
throughout the country will give it a plug in your speeches and in
I think it's
your publications and your economic education efforts.

5/19/92

-21-

very important to the near-term and long-term health of the economy.
Prospects are pretty good for continued growth in our District based
on the confidence that we hear increasingly expressed in the business
community and based on our leading indicator indexes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District economy
is growing, but it's still very slow and somewhat mixed. As others
have mentioned here, the agriculture area is subject to some
uncertainty due to the dry weather. Also, in our area cattle is a
very important industry and, although prices are up, there's a lot of
uncertainty there. With this environment of uncertainty there has
been some very reduced activity in the agricultural sector; in fact
our banks' loan-to-deposit ratios in that sector are at their lowest
levels in some time, at just over 50 percent. Manufacturing is mixed
to flat, I would say. In the aircraft industry there has been some
slowing in shipments recently. And in our auto industry, there has
been activity but no real expansion in activity, with some modest
gains overall in employment. Our energy industry is suffering very
significantly. The level of drilling activity in both oil and gas is
at post-World War II lows and [the outlook is] not at all good.
Everyone one talks with is blaming it on some of the regulatory
restrictions as much as on some of the economics, so that is a very
sore point in our area. As to the construction side, construction
activity in the residential sector has been very high but our
anecdotal information now suggests it is backing off from those highs
just as you hear is happening elsewhere.
On the commercial real estate side, there is some increased
absorption but still enough vacancies out there that we're not seeing
An important factor we've heard in
any significant pickup in prices.
very recent conversations is that in some of our areas the lease rates
remain extremely low. And until those pick up we don't really expect
that the price levels are going to pick up at all.
That includes
Denver, where there has been some activity; still, lease rates are
very favorable, and though we have had some sales we're not seeing a
real pickup in the prices or bidding to any large extent.
On the national economy, our projections are very similar to
those of the Greenbook. There are some differences. We are looking
at a little weaker consumer spending and residential investment, and a
little stronger government spending and stronger still business fixed
investment. On the inflation front, we're very much in line with the
staff forecast; we may be a little more optimistic on inflation but
not enough to make a real difference overall at this time.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I'd like to make two general comments; the first
relates to M2 and how to interpret that.
One comment that I don't
think has been made in the comments we've heard today is that some
work we've done would indicate in our view that the relationship of M2
to nominal GDP is stationary only over very long periods of time.
I
think we're talking five or more years.
It follows from that that the
ability to predict velocity shifts in the short run is not at all
good. Therefore, the idea that--and I'm not suggesting anybody has
advocated this--M2 can be used as a short-term targeting tool for

5/19/92

-22-

monetary policy, as far as I'm concerned, just doesn't fly.
To some
extent, I think the emphasis that we have placed on that target has
perhaps in a public relations sense painted us into a corner somewhat,
and there are probably ways to deal with that by citing some other
factors.
But the fact is, when push comes to shove in the short run,
I would have a hard time justifying a policy action aimed at trying to
get M2 into the target range or to some point in the target range for
these very reasons I've cited. Obviously, it's better to be in the
target range, but if we have questions about whether M2 is [outside
the range because of] technical or fundamental factors--and we're
pretty confident there are some important technical factors--I would
That's
be inclined to explain those and take the heat for missing it.
the first point I wanted to make.
The other point, which relates generally to the economy, is
that we're a year into the recovery now and my sense is, both in terms
of the statistics that we see and what I hear anecdotally, that the
pace is picking up. Obviously, the recovery is not in line with other
post World War II recoveries, but I think it's well in place and
picking up.
And I'd say that in general other forecasters are
probably looking for the best inflation performance in 1992 with some
Now, we all know what the Board staff's forecast is;
pickup in '93.
but even there Mike has seen fit, based on some recent information, to
ratchet the forecast up.
And I think we've seen from time-to-time,
not at the present moment, in the bond market and perhaps to some
extent in the foreign exchange markets some questions about the Fed's
resolve with respect to long-run price stability and so forth versus
short-run fine-tuning of the real economy.
The point I would make
with respect to that is that I don't think one can get terribly
alarmed by anything we've seen in those areas as yet, but once it's
clear in those indicators that we've lost credibility it's very hard
and very expensive to buy it back. So, in my view we want to stay
ahead of that. All of this is to suggest that I think the time really
has come for us to focus not on when we're going to ease next but on
And my final point on credibility
when it is we are going to tighten.
is that while words can help, this is one of those times when people
are going to watch what we do, not what we say.
Just very quickly on our District, the picture is the same as
I presented last month.
We are continuing to have moderate growth.
On the employment side, [growth] is coming primarily in the services
area. Manufacturing is still sluggish. In particular, strength on
the nonmanufacturing side is coming in construction; we have
residential and nonresidential contracts up 20 to 30 percent from the
prior three-month period. My sense is that in the nonresidential
I don't have any sense
sector it's primarily in the industrial area.
of [much] going on with transactions in office buildings and so forth
Finally, just the tone of the comments I pick up is
at this time.
improving. The anecdotal information seems to confirm this picture
we've been looking at for some time in terms of improving economic
activity in our District.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

I must say that over
MR. LAWARE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
the last six weeks or so I have become more of a cautious optimist
It seems to me that these most
about what is going on in the economy.
recent figures on consumer attitudes forebode a much brighter outcome.

5/19/92

-23-

Consumers have been gradually reducing their debt load, which I think
has helped to improve their feeling of confidence as reflected in
their attitudes toward housing, auto, and appliance acquisitions.
At
the same time, long rates most recently have shown some slight
improvement, and we have some reason to believe that that may now
continue.
The banking system I believe is substantially recovering
from the problems that have plagued it the last four or five years.
Operating margins, net interest margins have improved; earnings have
improved.
The restructuring of many of these institutions toward
greater efficiency is beginning to take hold.
Balance sheet values
are certainly much sounder and much closer to reality today than they
have been, although in some isolated instances there is still a ways
to go.
Clearly, they have better access to the capital markets so
that the capital shortages that still exist certainly can be dealt
with much more easily now than they could have been up until this
time.
I believe that these bankers are still cautious lenders.
I
think the burns haven't completely healed and the memories about
recent events will be long.
But I believe that they are now able, and
to some extent willing, to respond to legitimate demands.
So, I think
the banks will be able to finance whatever level of recovery is coming
along.
Corporate conditions, I think, have improved significantly.
Again, restructuring has had a very salubrious effect on corporate
balance sheets.
Corporations have eliminated in the process not just
people, but some poor businesses. The divestiture or even shutting
down of businesses that have been otherwise a drag bodes well for
future profitability. Also, the reduction in debt service has been
appropriate. They have done this through much more favorable debt
financing and by replacing debt with equity.
So, I think the general
tone there is better and that's why I'm a bit skeptical about the 1993
projection for corporate profits.
I think there may be some
fundamental improvement there that can be very helpful.
Having said all that, I think the progress on inflation is
disappointing in view of the length of time that we have had a fairly
restraining hand with regard to policy. And it's particularly
disappointing and puzzling that the figures are better when you leave
food and energy in right now than when you take them out. They've
always been seen as the wild cards.
It seems to me that the Greenbook forecast is a reasonable
one.
My own would be somewhat more optimistic but only marginally.
But I don't think we should be discouraged by a modest growth rate in
the GDP.
I think it is fully consistent with a continued move toward
price stability, which should be our objective. We must be sure to
stop pouring drinks while everyone is still sober, and probably the
next policy move will have to be toward restraint rather than ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
To start with the
District, I'd say the New England economy remains lethargic.
It's no
longer in a pronounced decline but it really has little
momentum going
in the opposite direction.
It's interesting actually to hear Bob
McTeer talk about things being more encouraging in Dallas.
We've said
that things are more encouraging in New England because on a moving

5/19/92

-24-

average basis the decline in employment last month was only 2 percent
at an annual rate. But we do think things are close to the bottom.
As far as different sectors go, after a fairly good opening
of the year, the retailers now seem--I've talked to some of them
myself--a fair bit more concerned. In housing, we don't know if this
has to do with weather or what the story is, but there does seem to
be--"softness" is too strong a word--an attenuation in the growth that
we've seen in housing.
It had done quite well; now, it's slowing off
again, which is why I asked the question about interest rate
sensitivity. And, of course, the expected depreciation is a very big
issue in New England.
As far as your question on real estate goes, it's a very
It depends a great deal on the sectors that
interesting pattern here.
In the pure office space sector, absorption now is
one looks at.
about flat; we don't have negative absorption any more. I hope none
of you has too much money in TIAA-CREF because you're going to take
We have an interesting phenomenon
some loss in the Boston market.
going on with the zero absorption; people are trading up at the same
price to higher quality space and there just isn't going to be a
market for some of the B+ quality space to [say nothing about the] C
space.
The retail market is really quite interesting in that it shows
We have a couple of new small
that real estate is very local.
shopping centers being built with new retailers coming in at the same
time that we have great excess capacity in retail space elsewhere. To
come back to something that Jerry Jordan talked about, the one area
where there has been some success in auction type sales has been in
the condo market. It hasn't held true in the commercial or the retail
or office building sectors, but in the condo market finding a price
floor has produced the same sort of pattern that Jerry talked about
for some of the markets.
We hear less about the credit crunch than we did a year ago,
although I think it's still somewhat of a residual drag. There are
some tentative signs of a pickup in lending. Some of these companies
that John LaWare talked about are in a better competitive position.
Some of our institutions have raised capital and there's nothing like
a little competition. We're hearing now about beating the drums of
who will be the next aggressive lender.
As far as the manufacturing sector in the region goes, that's
mixed.
Well, that's true obviously of anything that's tied to
defense, and we have a lot that's tied not only to defense but to
commercial aerospace, which is also somewhat weak. Until recently,
autos and housing-related manufacturers had been doing relatively
Digital puts on a
well.
An encouraging sign we just had is this:
show every couple of years where they bring people in from all over
the country. And actually they sold more equipment on the floor there
than they expected by a fair amount, though other manufacturers we
talked to are concerned about seeing their backlogs decline.
For the U.S. economy overall, I have little reason, as usual,
I can quibble on the unemployment
to disagree with the Greenbook.
rate, which we think might be a little higher in the out period than
Also, I reflect
the staff has it, but the difference is minimal.
everyone else's concerns about disappointment on inflation. Looking
ahead, while I don't have any disagreement with any individual

5/19/92

-25-

forecast--and this doesn't hold true just for the Greenbook--in most
forecasts there has been a serial correlation going out two to three
Again, it's not a
quarters, and we've all been overly optimistic.
criticism of any individual forecast but it makes me wonder why that
has been the case and whether it's more inertia and whether there has
been more of a shock to the economic system in some confidence sense
And it makes me worry, particularly since
[than was anticipated].
we're counting a bit [on] even the relatively anemic growth we see in
this quarter, [about] what is going to happen to PCE in the durables
sector and autos and in final sales generally. That leads me to the
view, even if I agree with this [forecast] that the probabilities are
fairly evenly balanced on the outlook, that I'm not sure the risks are
The reason is that if we were to get
relatively evenly balanced.
another negative surprise regarding the pickup, I'd be quite concerned
about the impact that could have on confidence and for building in
this inertia in terms of trying to get things moving. Another part of
that, though, is that I don't think there's very much we can do about
it.
Just looking at what is happening in several asset markets, there
is a potential for disappointment, an incongruity between the rate of
growth we expect in the economy and some asset [market behavior],
particularly in my own mind the securities markets. Now, I'm not
saying it's our role to ratify it, but I think we have to take into
consideration that that's a potential disappointment that is going to
come along and is going to have a negative pull on the economy.
I agree very much with Tom Melzer's comments on the Ms.
I've
always been pretty agnostic about that. But I think we're in this
difficult position in that we've said that we're watching the Ms, and
I worry about a situation in which we might have a combination of the
economy coming in soft and the aggregates being out of their ranges.
I'm worried about that even in a world in which we do want to get to
lower inflation. I think we all agree on [the desirability of]
getting to price stability, but the problem I have is that we could
see something snap in the process here that would lead to
protectionism, fiscal policy [moves], and other kinds of things that
would make it more difficult in an ironic way for us to get to price
stability. At some point I think we're going to get some happy
surprises in terms of this correlation of the forecasts, and I'm
looking forward to that and will be happy to deal with those when the
time comes.
Unfortunately, I have no reason to believe that there
should be any bias toward a happy surprise more than a continued
negative surprise at this point in time.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Thank you, Dick.

Governor Angell.

I've always been very sympathetic to watching
MR. ANGELL.
the monetary aggregates, and I believe that they really are a very
[integral] part of our fundamental program against inflation. But as
you know, from time-to-time I have looked carefully at other means to
determine whether or not there is a shift in demand for any one of the
aggregates. And I've concentrated on commodity prices as probably
being the most sensitive in showing whether or not monetary restraint
truly is in place or whether [policy is] characterized by monetary
ease. At the present time commodity prices, although they have the
reputation of being very volatile, seem rather stable to me.
If
there's any trend it's probably slightly upward but not as strong as
So, on the surface that
ordinarily would be seen in a recovery phase.
doesn't seem to show great inflation signals out ahead.

-26-

5/19/92

Gold prices probably need to be looked at some, particularly
since there are those who view the declining gold prices as
[unintelligible] into growth rates.
This thesis holds that M2 growth
has been very slow and it shows up by following gold prices.
I think
it's important to recognize that gold is always [unintelligible] in
regard to its monetary properties and for a long period of time gold
prices were lower than market forces would have dictated due to the
fact that many governments wanted to sell out their gold stocks.
Consequently, gold stayed in the [$340] range a lot longer than it
otherwise would have.
Costs of production in many places in the world
were way above that, and so there was no technology going into that
industry. When gold prices are running up so the optimists believe
the price is going to be in the $500 range, then you get a surge of
technology into that industry. And it seems to me we're experiencing
the impact of that surge. Indeed, the surge has been primarily a U.S.
surge.
In the United States, we've had during the 1980s over $8
billion of investments in gold mining, just as an example of what
technology can do when the price outlook is favorable. That has
resulted in a very quick [advance] for the United States from nowhere
in the park of gold producers to the number 2 position.
Indeed,
production in the United States is now above 60 percent of that in
South Africa and very well could exceed South African production
before the decade is over. A new technology involving heat-bleaching
means that the cost of production with that new technology runs closer
to $250 an ounce rather than to $350 an ounce. When you look at what
is happening in Chile and other areas around the world, it looks as if
this same technology probably is catching on in other places. One
would then expect the price of gold to fall closer to its cost-ofproduction in the marginally efficient areas.
I give this explanation
I suppose partly because I've begun to receive "hate mail" [accusing
me] of having been unresponsive to falling gold prices and [saying
that I] should have been an advocate of monetary ease based upon that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

How did you answer the question?

MR. ANGELL.
Well, I answered the question by saying that I
have never supported $350 an ounce gold; people just think that I do.
MR. LINDSEY.
wherever it is now!

I thought it was in support of gold $10 below

MR. ANGELL.
I see. Well, it's all right to be in that
direction.
It seems to me that we ought not let the current
information on inflation, disappointing as it is, cause us to move to
precipitate action.
It seems to me that sound money is something we
accomplish over a long period of time.
But it does suggest to me that
the level of restraint that's out there is probably not as great as
many have thought it to be and that we do need to be in a posture of
maintaining constant restraint over time until we get the producer
price index numbers behaving better than they're behaving. There's no
reason for us not to get inflation in the goods sector quickly down to
zero. And I think if we maintain the kind of posture that's needed,
that will occur.
I do think there will be a time lag between [that
and] the adjustment of inflation in the services sector to zero.
Looking at the real economy, the Greenbook forecast is one
with which I would have no strong arguments.
I would expect exports
to be somewhat stronger than in the Greenbook and I would expect

5/19/92

-27-

productivity gains in 1993 to be more of a continuation of the
patterns seen in 1992.
I would consequently expect corporate profits
to be in range similar to what John LaWare has outlined. It's a very
disappointing period in regard to those inflation numbers.
I think we
do not stand ourselves in good stead by representing too strong an
interest in movements in the real economy from quarter-to-quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the national economy, our
forecast is very similar to what Mike talked about earlier today. And
as he indicated, and others have also, I also have a feeling that the
risks are distinctly more balanced. That seems broadly consistent
with the kinds of things one hears on the anecdotal side with this
nagging question about sustainability, which is a question that nags
at me a little too.
But in talking with business people, especially
to the multinationals, most of them are now saying that things are
better and a few are saying that they're better with emphasis.
And
that, I think, is different.
Several people have cited exports;
again, the anecdotal comments from these companies are quite
consistent with that in terms of being surprised at how well their
export activity is holding up. And as Ted or Mike or somebody said, a
lot of it is to Latin America, Asia, Eastern Europe, and Japan.
On the commercial real estate question, I have reported over
several meetings a sense that the decline in prices in the New York
area had abated and perhaps even bottomed out.
And I think I
mentioned at least once that there were very specific transactions,
quasi-auctions, for very large buildings where they had cleared the
market. I know of at least a couple of cases [of property] sold by
banks where they cleared the market at prices that exceeded the
charged down level on the books of the banks--in other words, the
provisions which they had taken for [loan losses].
Now, at least in
the New York area--and someone may have touched on this when I was out
of the room--I think the Olympia & York situation does cast a bit of a
cloud over that. Their total real estate in New York is enormous and
I think it's a little too early to make a judgment on that. But that
could represent a further dent here, certainly in New York. The jury
is very, very much out so far as how that is going to play out.
As I
said, that introduces a new element of uncertainty.
Looking more broadly--a number of people have already touched
on this and I don't want to beat a dead horse--let me comment on this
inflation outlook issue. If I look at the 1993 forecast that Mike
has, 3.2 percent I think in the CPI ex food and energy, I sense that
that is a reasonable number.
I think it is going to be darn hard to
do better than that, and it's not so hard to see how we can do worse
than that.
Again, and John LaWare touched on this, in a broader
perspective of what has happened going back to 1988 in terms of the
CPI ex food and energy, we've essentially gone out through 1993 in the
forecast from a 4-1/2 percent core inflation rate to 3.2 percent.
So,
we will have brought about, if you will, a 1.3 percentage point
decline in core inflation. And if you look at it in terms of cost,
it's five years of cumulatively very modest growth at best; the last
two years, 1992 and 1993, are a little better but for the five years
as a whole, it's not much. Now, if you look at M2--and I agree with a
lot of people in that I think that's not the right thing to look at-we will have had seven years of distinctly modest M2 growth going out

-28-

5/19/92

through 1993.
What I keep coming back to here is that no matter what
we look at we also have to look at what is underneath, such as
compensation costs, productivity, and unit labor costs, and there's a
lot of slippage there. But when you go underneath, even if you look
at it simply as arithmetic and not as economics, it's still hard to
see--at least I find it hard to see--how we're going to do a heck of a
lot better, if at all better, than that very costly process that we've
seen over the last five years.
I don't think that should alter our
commitment to work toward that goal of price stability, however that's
defined.
But the evidence is rather overwhelming that this is a very
I don't see much that's
slow, costly, tough, grinding out process.
going to change that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I guess I have nothing especially useful or new
I
I generally agree with a lot of what has been expressed.
to add.
think we have a weak recovery. And as I understand the Greenbook, the
recovery is projected to be fueled by growth in consumption driven by
The only difficulty is identifying where the growth
growth in income.
I guess the answer is sort of everywhere
in income will come from.
and nowhere. Everything grows a little and the whole juggernaut
It seems to me
gradually moves forward and momentum will carry us.
that the concern about sustainability is really the fact that we can't
Perhaps we thought it was going to
point to an engine driving this.
be residential housing; I think there's evidence that the steam is
coming out of that.
And there are still concerns about losing steam
especially if the first-quarter growth rate turns out to be 4 percent
and the second quarter is 2 percent; that might have some impact on
It is encouraging that consumer buying attitudes, as John
confidence.
LaWare mentioned, in all three of the major categories of the Michigan
survey have steadily strengthened. But the overall confidence index
is still below where it was in the summer through September, though
When I look at the picture, I don't see much
that's still progress.
that is robust on the real side or the financial side, but there is
And, with
relatively broad-based progress in terms of moving forward.
the ample slack in production resources, echoing a little of what
Jerry Corrigan was saying, I don't see too much risk on the up side.
The economy still has an adjustment to make on defense spending, in
state and local governments such as California, and in commercial real
estate; we still have some further financial adjustment to go as well.
The economy could easily be
I think Bob Parry is probably right:
stronger with growth above 3 percent, but the consequences of that
sort of upside risk would not bother me much.
It is discouraging that after the long period of slow
economic growth and many years of slow money growth we haven't made
I should point out that I think we've
more progress on inflation.
only had significant slack in the economic system for a little over a
year and a half now. When I came on the Board the unemployment rate
was 5-1/2 percent and capacity utilization was 85 percent or higher.
It is also interesting to note that inflationary expectations as
measured by the Michigan survey in the near term continue to come down
gradually; but it is still true that core CPI is 4 percent, where it
I think it is probably deeply embedded.
has been for eight years.
On the financial side, short rates in real terms look low now
and less low for lending to bank customers because the prime rate is

-29-

5/19/92

6-1/2 percent; it still has the margin built into it and consumer
So, I think we still have something
rates have that margin as well.
of a dichotomy where I see easy conditions on rates in the financial
markets and somewhat tighter conditions in the intermediated markets.
I think it's fair to say that the yield curve is still very steep, and
it's not clear to me that this is driven by inflationary expectations.
It's pretty clear that people are betting big money that rates are
going to be a lot higher in a year or so. And I think it's not at all
unlikely, even if inflation doesn't re-emerge when credit demands
re-emerge, that we will be joining the global village of high real
rates just as everyone else has high real short-term rates.
We're
really the outlier in the world, and it's primarily because we have
such weak loan demand.
As far as M2 is concerned, I'm certainly not here to praise
it; I thought we buried it last summer but someone dug it up again.
I'm fully prepared to accept the notion that the traditional
relationship between M2 and GDP has been distorted by weakness in the
financial system associated with restructuring. Just because the
traditional relationship is altered does not mean that a sharp
deceleration of M2 conveys no useful information. Obviously, I'm a
bit biased by this coincidence last summer. We've only had a handful
of months in recorded economic history where M2 has been negative or
zero. We had one last July and then August and September were
essentially flat.
In the fourth quarter, we did get some deceleration
but now in March and April it is negative. Clearly, the traditional
relationships don't hold, but dramatic decelerations still make me
nervous.
Now, since the RTC has shut down temporarily, M2 should snap
back smartly, presumably. And we're over the tax season. I don't
know how much comfort to take in Tom Melzer's observation that the
I tend to
relationship holds only over a long period of five years.
conclude from that that we're going to have five years of stagnation
some time in the future. The only other thing I would add to the M2
debate--other than saying that it's a mystery and I'm less concerned
with it being low than with the deceleration--is that it's not only M2
that is weak and not only M2 and M3 that are weak but L is weak. It's
not just intermediated liabilities that are weak. Domestic
nonfinancial nongovernmental debt is, I would suggest, about as weak
as it has been in any period we've recorded. Even when you throw in
the government, who is usually a dependable borrower, it still looks
relatively weak. So, my view is that with projected GDP growth in the
second quarter of 2 percent, with 1 percent of that coming from autos
and 1/2 percent from inventories, without a dependable engine to keep
the momentum going, with this weakness in credit pretty much across
the board, and less concern for capacity to overshoot at this stage, I
still think the most prudent stance is to remain sensitive to the
risks of losing momentum.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, we are now five months into the
year. At the very first of the year, there was an extremely strong
consensus that [economic activity] was going to start out very slow
and then begin to gain a bit of momentum in the second quarter and be
much stronger thereafter. A contrariness instinct at that time was to
"Where is the surprise going to come from?" because
ask the question:
the consensus was too strong. There was some indication that the
surprise might be on the up side, and by the time we met in March it

5/19/92

-30-

News over
was fairly clear that we were getting an upside surprise.
the last six weeks has been that it looks as if the first quarter was
So, it seems now that the question has
even better than [expected].
"Is what we've seen so far something of a
shifted just a little to:
false dawn or are we going to continue to be favorably surprised on
There is the usual array of factors and we've certainly
the up side?"
been through them this morning. On the concern side are the
Several
aggregates and the fact that housing has again slowed a bit.
commercial real estate,
sea anchors are still [restraining growth]:
the defense slowdown, net exports, and the disappointment we all feel
in the year so far with regard to the CPI ex food and energy. As I
look at that array it seems to me that people might say in the market
And while it's still
that most of that has been there for a while.
there it has had its impact.
On the other hand, I think one can say that there may be, and
hopefully are, a couple of emerging trends on the favorable side that
haven't really had a chance to catch on yet.
One may be employment
growth.
I've been taught since I've been here that the payroll survey
on employment is more reliable than the household survey, and I accept
that.
But it may be that early in a recovery here we are getting some
I wouldn't suggest that
leadership from the household survey.
employment has grown 350,000 a month, but it may be that the household
survey is telling us that [employment growth] is somewhat stronger
than we thought. If the household survey is telling us good things,
they are coming from the places that traditionally have helped a lot
and that is small-business entrepreneurial activity and so forth, [and
the statistics] may lag a little [before] the payroll survey picks
The other [favorable trend] that may just be beginning to
that up.
set in is in the area that we've called in short hand "the credit
crunch."
An array of factors is there. As John discussed a while
Their profitability is up; their
ago, banks clearly are stronger:
liquidity is high; their balance sheets have come back; the loan
officers survey indicates that they are getting a little more ready to
On
lend money, and there are indications that that should continue.
the demand side, there's a lot of anecdotal information that small and
medium-size business credit demand is beginning to come back. We know
that balance sheets have been restructuring generally across the
board, and consumers have been very reluctant to borrow; they might
come back.
So, it seems to me that we could well be seeing an
incipient trend toward a better climate for credit extensions. There
The dollar has been on the weak side. We
are some other things, too.
may get a little better [performance of] net exports as a result of
that. Consumer confidence is not high but it has been rising
steadily, and it seems to me that it's very responsive to employment.
And if we do get the good news on employment that I hope is going to
come, then maybe that will give a further boost to consumer
confidence.
So, I think it's possible to build a rather plausible, rosy
scenario here around employment growth and a thaw in credit conditions
I'm not buying into that wholeheartedly;
more than anything else.
But I think
there are too many negatives still out there to do that.
the odds are improving that real activity is going to continue to
improve. And there's a fair to good chance that we can hold policy
I certainly hope so because, if that's the case, I think
where it is.
that improves the chances [for continued expansion] for a while
And the
without our tightening too much as the economy strengthens.

-31-

5/19/92

longer we can do that responsibly the better news there will be over
the long haul.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, growing up I never thought I'd be
an economist; I didn't know what an economist was.
I think my mother
is still waiting for me to make something of my life and go to law
school!
But I always liked math and I liked history and I found them
together in economics.
And my first comment is on math.
I don't think anyone thinks velocity is stable on a quarterto-quarter basis.
In fact, on a distributional basis using the 120
quarters from 1961 to 1990, there is a 7-1/2 percent chance of
velocity being more than 3 and an 18.3 percent chance of velocity
being more than 2.
And if you use lagged velocity, I have a
distributed lag function where the odds are even greater than that:
29.2 percent for having a velocity shock of more than 2 percent.
So,
I think what we're seeing now is very much in line with historical
averages on the up side. One need only to think back to the early
1980s.
I wasn't here, but I've looked at the numbers; there was a
very strong negative velocity shock on the order of perhaps 2-1/2 or 3
percent a year.
So, I don't know if we really want to abandon
velocity just because it's unstable on a quarter-to-quarter basis.
I
agree with President Melzer's comment in fact that it's over long
periods of time that M2 and the M2 velocity relationship are stable.
Of course, that means that if we're going to have 4-1/2 percent
nominal GDP growth and we have a year and a half of 2-1/2 percent M2
growth, that we should be equally comfortable with a year and a half
of 6-1/2 percent M2 growth. If one is willing to let [M2 growth] go
to 2 or 1-1/2 or 1 percent, one should also be willing to let it go to
7 or 7-1/2 or 8 percent for an equally long period of time on the
other side. So, the real question is whether or not we want to use
money as a policy variable in constraining [the economy].
The point
is that velocity is stable over the long run, so we're going to have a
bounceback. Indeed, all the explanations we've heard this morning
suggest that that's the case. Don Kohn yesterday mentioned that if we
include the yield curve we can explain perhaps a 1-1/2 point velocity
shock.
I don't think anyone thinks the yield curve is going to remain
as steep as it is now. It's going to bounce back and so will
velocity. How about the flight from CDs?
Well, certainly, it isn't
going to go on forever; eventually CDs would go down to zero and then
[the decline] would have to stop.
My suspicion is that CDs probably
will catch on at some point in the future and money will flow back
into CDs.
So, again, we have to think about the fact that in the long
term we have a stable relationship here.
M2 growth of 2-1/2 percent
is not a long-term sustainable rate of growth. How long we want to
tolerate it in the short run is something we might want to debate.
But no one says that it's a short-term parameter. That's the math
lesson.
The history lesson is one that I was debating about, but my
contrariness juices really got flowing.
I heard a wholesale
abandonment of money here this morning and that takes three [forms];
(1) money doesn't matter; (2) banking weakness is also not a monetary
phenomenon; and (3) that one [assesses] monetary ease by looking at
interest rates and not money growth.
I happen to have these quotes
from history; we've been here before.
As to the first that money

-32-

5/19/92

These events "shattered the long-held belief, which
doesn't matter:
had been strengthened during the 1920s, that monetary forces were
important elements in the cyclical process and that monetary policy
was a potent instrument for promoting economic stability. Opinion
shifted almost to the opposite extreme, that 'money doesn't matter'
that it's a passive factor which chiefly reflects the effects of other
They went on to say that
That was Friedman and Schwartz.
forces."
there was a tendency--this is again in the early '30s--to regard bank
failures and contraction of deposits "as regrettable consequences of
bad management and bad banking practices or as inevitable reactions to
prior speculative excesses,"--Where have I heard that before--"or as a
consequence but hardly a cause of the financial and economic collapse"
And finally, regarding nominal interest rates, a
of the time.
gentleman named Sprague who was a consultant to the Fed--and this was
in February 1931--wrote that the Fed concluded that an aggressive easy
money policy was practically out of the question in the United States
"for there is no general acceptance of view in this country that
additional good loans and additional good investments are available at
And continuing on the line that short-term
a lower rate of interest."
nominal rates are a measure of policy, the Annual Report of the Fed in
"The Federal Reserve pursued a policy of monetary ease" in
1930 said:
"The credit policy of the Federal
In 1931 it said:
the last year.
Reserve System in the first nine months was directed toward the
furtherance of easy credit conditions, as indicated by further
And finally in
reductions in rates on discounts and acceptances."
1932--this is over a period in which money shrank by a third-"Conditions in the open market for short-term money were relatively
easy throughout the year and in the latter part money rates declined
We've been there before. My suspicion
to exceptionally low levels."
I certainly hope
is, and my fear is, that we might be there again.
not. And finally, this is from the FOMC statement of October 1935 and
"The Committee
suggests that inflation is always a fear we have:
cannot fail to recognize that the rapid growth of bank deposits and
bank reserves in the past year and a half is building up a credit base
which may be very difficult to control if undue credit expansion
They were worried about it in 1935.
should become evident."
With regard to existing conditions, clearly we're on a good
path.
I'm not sure that an easing at this time is the right thing to
do, but whenever I see the kind of wholesale abandonment of monetary
So, I'd rather
aggregates that I heard this morning I get nervous.
have the gun loaded, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS..PHILLIPS. Thank you. I think I'm bringing up the tail
It seems that since I've
end again and I'll keep my comments short.
been here we've been on the cusp of a recovery, trying to get a
Certainly the signs on the real side are more
recovery going.
I
positive this time; certainly that's what we've heard this morning.
find myself being concerned about and questioning its strength and its
Some of the sources of strength that we've been
sustainability.
pointing to the last couple of months--housing and exports--seem to be
And I think it's interesting that no one has really
fading a bit.
talked today about some of the problems in the economy that we seem to
The first one that I'd point to is the federal
have forgotten about.
deficit, which I think is a continuing drag on the economy. We have
talked about the state and local government shortfalls, and I've seen

5/19/92

-33-

a few tax increases coming out of some states but not a lot.
So, I
think we're going to continue to see that as a drag on the economy.
The major area of concern that I would point to--and I would
magnify perhaps Dick Syron's [remark] with respect to its potential-is consumer confidence, which seems to me to be very much tied into
the labor market situation. I think the 7.2 percent unemployment rate
perhaps understates some of the weakness in the labor market because
of the pervasiveness of unemployment through a variety of occupations
and the restructuring that is going on in industry.
This whole
concept of underemployment and downward mobility is continuing to
lengthen the period of time it's going to take us to get a real
recovery going.
Certainly, on the money and credit aggregates, which
we've talked about so I won't go into it, I'd agree with Larry:
I
don't think we ought to abandon M2; we ought to look to see what it's
saying at least in part.
On inflation, I am concerned that we're
still seeing a bit higher inflation than we'd like.
I would have to
say, however, that we need to expand our research on what zero
inflation is.
I'm beginning to wonder if we're not getting closer to
it than the traditional CPI measure or even the deflator would imply.
On balance and in sum, I'm pleased that we're making some progress but
the risk of another stall is certainly in the realm of possibilities.
So, I think we should be alert to weakness on the real side.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Thank you, governor.

MR. MELZER.
Jerry, I might interject for those who worry
about money that from the third quarter of 1987 to the first quarter
of 1992, M2 grew at a 4.2 percent annual rate even with all the
weakness we've had recently.
MR. MULLINS.
zero real M2 growth?
MR. MELZER.

So, with 4 percent inflation we're looking at
Yes.

MR. LINDSEY.

Do you have our average target for that period?

MR. MELZER.

No, I don't.

MR. ANGELL.

The average target would be more like 4-1/2 to 5

percent.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not only did that note about the coffee
say that the note was an hour and a half late, but I think the coffee
probably arrived an hour and a half before the note!
SPEAKER(?).

You're right!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

With that,

I would like to call upon Mr.

Kohn.
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any questions for Mr. Kohn?

-34-

5/19/92

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is in a sense a procedural
question:
As I read the Bluebook and the projections for the monetary
aggregates, particularly the alternatives, the time frame is from
March and April to June.
I wonder if we wouldn't be better served in
the policymaking decision to have a longer time frame extending beyond
June for those projections.
We're practically at June now. I assume
you have those [longer-term] projections, and it seems to me that it
would be better to have a projection out perhaps to the fourth
quarter.
MR. KOHN. President Forrestal, if you look at paragraph 15
in the Bluebook, it gives a sense of where the aggregates might come
out for the year--1/2 point more or less than for Alternative B with
the selection of "A" or "C."
We have been going for many, many years
with this [procedure], but I agree with you. The reason that
paragraph 15 is in the Bluebook is that the effect of anything done in
the middle of May probably would be greater in July and August than it
would be in May and June, so you do need to be thinking about that.
MR. FORRESTAL.
done for a long time.

Yes,

I realize this is the way it has been

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think there is another problem with
that in the sense that if we introduce a longer-term time frame for
money supply where it tends to override the targets that we came out
with at the beginning of the year, what we're in danger of doing is
having two forecasts.
It's essentially the targets on the one hand
and a specific one on the other.
In general that might be fine if the
second forecast is close to the middle of [the target range]; but if
it is not, we're raising an interesting question about what it is
we're trying to do.
It's almost as though we're trying to find a
degree of accuracy that I think isn't even remotely possible.
I would
be more inclined to the argument that we drop that forecast than
extend it too far because our ability to forecast is awful.
MR. SYRON. You raise an interesting question--maybe not
facetiously--about dropping it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would prefer to drop it.
I have not
given it any thought until this minute, but I ask:
What does it do
for us?
What would happen if we were to drop it?
MR. KOHN. Well, I think the issue would be how it feeds in.
Perhaps it's an issue that really should be discussed in July because
it's a question of having annual ranges and where the aggregates are
[currently] relative to those ranges or whether you care where they
are relative to the ranges.
If you were to drop the-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Could you draft us a memorandum?
you circulate to the Committee the pros and the cons?
MR. KOHN.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Include President Forrestal's
recommendation. That ought to be addressed.
MR. KOHN.

Certainly.

Could

5/19/92

-35-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There are a lot of anachronisms sitting
in our directive. Every time I read it I'm waiting for somebody
somewhere to write a fun piece in some newspaper about the Federal
Reserve directive!
I hope Bill Saffire of The New York Times doesn't
get hold of that!
MR. KELLEY.

How about Art Buchwald?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Either one of them!

MR. ANGELL. You know, it's written as it would be written if
we were going to publish it the next day.
MR. SYRON.
And as if we [know] all of the structural shifts
in these relationships and how tight they are.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. MULLINS.
He might also compile our estimating accuracy
over the past few years!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
time to time.

That's a mean thing to say!

We do actually do that as an internal matter from

MR. LINDSEY.

Very internal!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Don?

MR. SYRON.
Just a quick technical question. Don, you
mentioned that the lags had to do with the tax payments and some of
the other things that we think have distorted these [numbers].
Could
you quantify the lags from the inside to the outside of the deposits?
MR. KOHN. Well, on the taxes, I certainly expected the sort
of snapback we saw.
[Our analysis suggested that] those checks would
be clearing in late April and the first half of May-MR. SYRON.

Right.

MR. KOHN.
--and that's when one would expect to see a
snapback [in money growth].
So, the fact that we had a $9 billion
increase, or whatever it was, in M2 last week and that we have another
increase in the $4 to $5 billion range coming for the week of May 11th
is not surprising. And it's heavily in the M1 component, which is
where the transactions money is, where you'd expect most though not
all of the tax payments to be made.
So, I'd expect the tax [effect]
to play out pretty much by the second half of May. The other
[factors] I think are much harder to explain.
The [effect of] RTC
activity is a bit contrary to common sense. We have always found,
though, that there were some lags in that.
That is, RTC activity one
and two months ago was having an effect on M2 growth this month. Now,
I think that's partly because it does take a while:
peoples'
depository relationships are disrupted; they get notices that their
rates are reduced or a new bank has taken over and it takes them a
while to react to that and to reconsider their portfolios.
So,
perhaps it's not that contrary to common sense, but there is a little

-36-

5/19/92

So, given the lack of RTC activity after about the second
lag there.
week of April or so, we probably will begin to feel that more in June
and moving into the third quarter. And on the other one, the interest
rate [effects], the lags are of course even longer so that they can
play out over a longer period of time. We have by the way, President
Forrestal, about 3-3/4 percent growth on a quarterly average basis
projected under "B" for the third quarter and then 4-1/2 percent for
So, we would have a strengthening in the third
the fourth quarter.
quarter, presumably.
MR. SYRON.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. To catch up a bit with you on where you are
I don't know what you were
compared to where you thought you were:
looking at in terms of alternatives in your midyear review last year
If at that
but you mentioned an easing in policy since last summer.
time you had run your model contemplating a drop of 200 basis points
in the funds rate over the next nine months, what would you have been
projecting for the Committee in terms of monetary growth?
MR. KOHN. I'm sure I would have been projecting several
percentage points more than we had, but at the same time we did embody
in the projections to the Committee last year and in February of this
year an expectation of downward shifts in money demand. So, I don't
think we would have been as far off as you might imagine just from
feeding that [funds rate decline] through because we were aware at the
time that things were out of kilter relative to the standard models.
We allowed for that; last February we were predicting only 3-1/2 or 4
So, we had allowed all along for some
percent [M2] growth for 1992.
slippage there. But I'm sure we would have been predicting probably
about 2 percentage points more--maybe instead of 3-1/2 percent more
like 5-1/2 percent for 1992--if you had told me in July that we were
going to have 2 percentage points lower interest rates.
MR. JORDAN. With your past experience with the model, what
is the probability you would assign of an offsetting error going
Is that a tendency you have any confidence in?
forward?
MR. KOHN. Well, there used to be, but I don't have much
confidence in that right now given that we've had a string of about
eight shortfalls in a row counting the second quarter of this year. A
couple of years ago I would have said that I'd expect some offsetting
But I don't expect that now. We are
errors and come out about right.
not projecting an offsetting error in our projections of 3-1/2 percent
for 1992 and 4 percent for 1993 for M2 growth consistent with the
Greenbook GNP; we do not have offsetting errors built in. We have
continued increases in velocity. We do have a fading out of some of
the shift that's occurring; instead of continued downward shifts we
have it fading out gradually.
MR. JORDAN. Okay, that answer suggests a one-time level
adjustment on M2, a mirror image of what happened in 1983 when MMDAs
were introduced.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

-37-

5/19/92

MR. JORDAN. We got double-digit growth of M2 for about a
year. We all recognized it as a shift of the level and then resumed
[with] what a model [would predict] afterwards.
MR. KOHN.
MR. JORDAN.

Right.
Is that the way you would characterize this

period?
MR. KOHN. Well, no, in the sense that in 1982 one could
identify a specific deregulation event.
We knew the MMDAs were
coming. We actually surveyed people to find out what they were
shifting into NOW accounts and whatnot.
In one sense you're right:
If the shifting stopped and it was just a level adjustment, that would
be fine.
I'd have more confidence in that if I saw the shifting stop.
But in an underlying economic sense, I think a very different kind of
thing is going on. One can't identify it so strongly with an external
deregulation or technology change as we had with Ml in the mid-1970s.
It's something much deeper in the intermediation process and I think
harder to analyze.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. What's the sample period, Don, over which you
estimate your standard model?
MR. KOHN.

I think it's about 1963 to 1986.

Is that right,

Dave?
MR. D. LINDSEY.

I think it goes up to 1988 now.

MR. KOHN. It's the same model, however, that we used in the
conference we had in 1987 on money demand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Don, in your comments about the structure of
interest rates and the yield curve, I don't think I heard you say
anything about the supply factor and the impact that has on rates.
that in your mind not an issue?

Is

MR. KOHN. Well, I think it's a smaller issue than expected
in increases in real interest rates because of where we've driven
short-term real rates and perhaps inflation as well.
I tend to
discount it to a certain extent. On the supply, one thinks of not
only government but even more particularly corporations and households
shifting way out on the yield curve. On the other hand, we have had
the households supplying the funds in some sense through shifts into
bonds and mutual funds.
It probably had some effect but a small one
relative to the other [factors], in my judgment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Could I follow up on Jerry Jordan's question?
At what point do you predict that the leveling off of velocity will
occur?

-38-

5/19/92

MR. KOHN. Well, in terms of our models we actually have the
demand shift pretty well dying out by next year. We do have an
We would
increase in velocity next year on the order of 1 percent.
view that partly as still a working down of some things like savings
accounts and NOW accounts, in our models anyhow. And I think that
Rates on some of these
will probably be true in real life as well.
types of accounts, like NOW accounts and savings accounts, will
continue to drop very slowly over an extended period of time in
So, we will have an increase in velocity
response to the lower rates.
next year but not really a money demand shift.
MR. LINDSEY. Could we call that a continuing response to the
steepness of the yield curve?
The way the
MR. KOHN. No, that [effect] sort of dies out.
yield curve plays out in our model is that it is affecting [M2 growth]
this year and is rather neutral for 1993.
It's not affecting it much
one way or another.
MR. LINDSEY.
level out?

What happens when the yield curve starts to

MR. KOHN. Well, assuming that the CD rates then come into
closer alignment with market rates and market rates level out, then
I'd expect some reflows into M2.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Don?

MR. MCTEER. On the question of resumed bank lending, have
you taken much account of the risk-based deposit insurance as well as
the risk-based capital coming into view?
MR. KOHN. Only a little, I think. We implicitly had a sense
that banks would not be actively pursuing deposits in order to make
loans in part because the cost of making loans is going to be higher.
We had,
We have not specifically factored in the risk-based premium.
I believe, a notion that premiums would be higher; whether they would
be risk-based or not is another issue.
That may be more an issue of
distribution of loans throughout the banking system rather than the
total.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?
If not, why don't I
Listening to this general conversation, it creates a
get started.
somewhat better outlook than I was perceiving as I walked into the
room--not a great deal better, but enough to be somewhat noticeable.
The general consensus around here, which is clearly supported by the
data, is that the economy is moving forward on a fairly broad front
but that nothing seems to be moving very quickly. There doesn't seem
to be significant, outsized momentum in any sector, but it does seem
to be gradual and pervasive across a fairly broad [spectrum].
The crucial question, however, is how fast [the expansion in
I think the issue that Mike Prell raised with
the economy] really is.
respect to the first-quarter GNP problems is a clear indication that
there is something peculiar in our data system. There may be
something to the argument that the payroll series could be more
deficient this time than usual. The general argument that we all can
make with respect to month-by-month changes in employment is that the

5/19/92

-39-

standard error of the employment change in the household series is
very high.
It isn't all that high if you take a time frame of four,
five, six, or seven months, average two or three months on one end and
two or three months on the other, and calculate the standard error of
that change; it's obviously very substantially lower.
So, it's hard
to believe that with a sample of 60,000 [in the household series],
with some historical parallelism to the payroll series, that the
argument has to be that the payroll series is really being
representative and that the man-hour data that are implicit in it are
the best indicator for industrial production because, remember,
industrial production is weaker than the GDP. Obviously, if we
decided that the household payroll series was accurate and built up
the gross domestic product side with those data, then the statistical
discrepancy, which is the problem with the first quarter, would narrow
very considerably. And, obviously, what you would get is a
significant rise in the saving rate in the first quarter which, of
course, is where the discrepancy change gets offset in the accounts.
When you look at that, you ask if it is possible that the economy is
really growing at 3-1/2 to 4 percent [and] that we have a saving rate
which suggests that there is actually room for consumption to move
faster than income; that is sort of a scenario that suggests there is
more buoyancy in this outlook than the first-quarter data show. The
truth of the matter is that I'm not sure anyone can judge that.
The
anecdotal evidence raises questions as to whether the economy has
anywhere near that type of momentum. Even though the orders data in
manufacturing look somewhat better, they are not consistent with the
type of significant rise in employment in manufacturing that one must
presume would be part of the acceleration in household employment of
the size or order of magnitude that we've been seeing in recent
months.
I conclude that we're probably doing somewhat better in
employment than the payroll series [indicates] but far short of the
household series [increase] in that the economy in the first quarter
was fairly good.
The only question I would have with it is whether it is too
much too soon in the sense that rather than going into the second
quarter with inventory liquidation, we're going in with very modest
liquidation and with upside momentum. If one looks at the data as
they are materializing with respect to auto sales, starts, and the
like, they don't suggest a really robust second quarter.
It also looks as though we are financing this recovery very
heavily internally.
If you look at the household sector, for example,
there's very little borrowing. That essentially means that both gross
asset expansion and gross liability expansion are very significantly
below normal. That is another way of saying that M2, which is on the
household asset side, is exceptionally slow and that the slow
borrowing, with everyone financing internally, is an element of risk
aversion. Clearly, that has also been the case, although I suspect to
an increasingly lesser extent in the corporate sector where one must
presume, if these numbers are correct, that a very significant
increase in cash flow is going on and that even though we have some
fairly heavy borrowing externally a very large amount of financing
with internal funds is going on pretty much as usual.
So, this is in a way an odd sort of recovery, one that we've
discussed at length in connection with the question of balance sheet
repair, which is another way of saying that a significant amount of

-40-

5/19/92

cash flow is going to pay off debt rather than going to the
consumption of goods and services or investment. The outlook does not
seem to have changed significantly from the last time we were here
when there appeared to be some form of financial ceiling on the
economy basically represented by the balance sheet pressures and
essentially reflected in the fact that every time the economy seems to
What we have learned
pick up, long-term interest rates seem to go up.
apparently is that that is having an effect on a number of areas, very
specifically on the housing area, which leads me to conclude--pretty
much as I have been concluding since the beginning of the year--that
the crucial statistic in the outlook is nominal long-term interest
rates.
To the extent that they have a significant effect in the
housing market and the turnover of mortgages, refinancing, they have
been a critical factor in the general forward thrust of the economy.
I think we're also learning that the inclination at the long
end of the market for rates to move lower with lower federal funds
While I must say that I can't give a
rates is increasingly dubious.
persuasive analytical argument at this particular stage, I nonetheless
would be willing to put money on the table that moving the fed funds
rate lower right now would not bring a lower long-term bond yield.
However, that may not continue to be the case. As a consequence of
that, I would be disinclined to try to move the funds rate lower now,
but if it turns out that at some point it begins to look as though we
might be able to prod the long-term rate lower were we to move the
funds rate, I personally would be more inclined in that direction.
Frankly, my overall view is that we are probably more likely as a
Committee to be moving to lower rates than to higher rates in the next
several months. The next move is more likely to be down than up, but
I don't think the odds are skewed enough in that direction to argue in
favor of an asymmetric directive. I must admit that I don't have any
I would be somewhat inclined
strong feelings personally either way.
toward symmetry if for no other reason than that in listening to the
tone of the individual District discussions, things are somewhat
better than I would have suspected; but I could live with an
asymmetric directive. In either case, I would argue that we should
I would prefer symmetric but could very easily
adopt alternative B.
President
go with asymmetric if that's what the Committee wants.
Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would strongly support your
It seems to me quite likely that the economy could be
recommendation.
growing at a rate of 3 percent over the next six quarters.
At the
same time, all of our forecasts are showing that inflation is not
In that kind of environment
going to show significant improvement.
and with those kinds of prospects, I think it would be very desirable
I
not to change policy and also to have a symmetrical directive.
might also point out that if we get a very significant upward revision
of those first-quarter data and the next thing that hits the financial
market is the fact that we had an asymmetric toward ease directive, I
don't think that would be received very favorably in the financial
markets at all.
So, I believe the case for a symmetric directive is
quite strong. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I could support an asymmetric
directive if it were toward tightness and I could accommodate myself

-41-

5/19/92

to a symmetric directive as you have suggested.
It seems to me that
we do encounter some likelihood over the coming period that the fed
funds rate might need to be closer to 5 percent than to 3-3/4 percent;
and money growth, M2, right now doesn't give us any leeway to make
that move at this point in time. So, symmetric will work for me.
But
I just wanted you to know my leanings and also my inability to support
the asymmetric direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. FORRESTAL.
symmetric directive.

I would support alternative B with a

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.
directive.

President Forrestal.

Governor Kelley.

I support alternative B with a symmetric

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I understand from your logic that
we should keep our options open. That is a very compelling case. One
of the first things I learned at my first [Committee] meeting was that
the "would/mights" were not an insect but in fact inhabit our monetary
halls.
This sounds to me as not a "would/might" situation but a
"would/would" situation.
I think we want a symmetric directive but
want to keep our options open to indicate that we [are prepared] to
respond to economic data.
So, in stating my opinion, perhaps I'm
asking a question:
Does your suggestion for symmetry mean a
"would/would" directive or a "might/might" directive?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't have a clue!

MR. LINDSEY.
Then I would recommend the "would/would" as an
approach if we want symmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me say this:
I will be disinclined,
frankly, to support moving lower unless we see some real signs that
this [recovery] is starting to stall out. And I'd need a little more
than just a vague notion; I'd need a set of data suggesting a
cumulative process that in my judgment probably would incline this
Committee toward moving lower even from a symmetric directive. But I
would be a little cautious if we kept seeing a steady economic
recovery and M2 looked awfully weak. I would conclude from that that
we have more of a problem with M2 than we have with the economy. But
if we saw both beginning to look rather shabby, then I think it would
be incumbent on us to move lower.
I would also say that should we get
a change in the economic environment, it would be appropriate for us
to have a telephone conference and discuss it because, if there is a
real change in the economic environment, the group around this table
collectively would have a good sense of that.
If there seemed to be
some evidence that this recovery was faltering and it were not
confirmed in the individual Districts, I would question the data. So,
even though I'm saying we should keep our options open, I do think we
ought to be cautious about moving too quickly unless the evidence
really begins to mount. This is a very unusual set of circumstances
and a type of period where we could make the kind of mistakes that

-42-

5/19/92

monetary policy often makes at the bottom of the cycle.
whether that's "would/would" or "might/might."

I don't know

MR. KOHN. The Secretary's view is that "might" captures that
thought better than "would."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, following on your last comment, Mr.
Chairman, I too favor "B," symmetric.
In part, I think we have to be
careful not to respond to what we already know--the sense that we
continue to look at a modest recovery by historic standards.
Presumably, that's what we expect. We continue to expect for the next
six weeks anyway to look at pretty sluggish M2 expansion; that's what
the Bluebook expects at least.
If that isn't acceptable, we ought to
want to change policy. With regard to M2, since I didn't weigh in
earlier, I might try to muddy the waters a little further right now.
Governor Lindsey's point about the volatility of M2 velocity in the
short run is undoubtedly correct.
I recall that we ran some
simulations several years ago that said that if we really wanted to
apply fairly rigorous confidence intervals to the annual M2 targets,
then the ranges shouldn't be 3 or 4 percentage points wide; they
really had to be 6 to 8 percentage points wide if we wanted to be
reasonably confident of achieving them. That tells you that there's a
lot of short-run volatility in velocity. As to whether M2 is going to
or has to bounce back at some point, I must admit I'm getting
increasingly skeptical.
I think we may need to devote a little more
time to that question and the role of that aggregate.
If I think
about what has transpired recently and what is different, it seems to
me that customers of depository institutions today--customers broadly
defined--clearly face a wider range of choices than they did certainly
10 or 20 years ago, the time encompassed in the estimation period of
these models.
Clearly, banks and other institutions face a much wider
range of choices when it comes to pricing and other policies than they
did 10 or 20 years ago.
And we're also operating for the most part in
a lower interest rate environment than we have over a sustained period
of time. Maybe we have to go back to the '60s to find something like
this, at least for short rates.
So, as I think about all that, it's
not clear to me that there's going to be some automatic correction in
M2 or indeed that a correction in M2 is desirable in these
circumstances.
A lot has changed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Banks have disappeared; depository
institutions have disappeared.
The way we measure some or most of M2
almost surely-MR. STERN.

Right.

When does
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's an interesting question:
this long-term trend we are all forecasting begin to affect the M2
data?
MR. LAWARE.

Congress is working on it!

[Laughter]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since you have the floor, Governor
LaWare, why don't you stay with it.

-43-

5/19/92

MR. LAWARE. Well, for all the reasons cited in my earlier
sermon, I support your recommendation of "B" symmetric although I
would like to identify myself with Governor Angell's preference for
asymmetric toward restraint.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. I always have to translate what I think it
really means when people talk in terms of raising and lowering the
funds rate in the sense of tightening and easing policy.
I've come to
understand that easing in the sense of the funds rate doesn't mean we
are more stimulative necessarily and raising the funds rate doesn't
mean we are more restrictive.
We have difficulties [not only] in
communicating [that] outside this room, but translating it inside.
I was pleased that Governor Lindsey mentioned the 1930s in
that context of easing and tightening because otherwise I would have
been shy about mentioning something that relates to 60 years ago.
I
read that period a little differently in that, first of all, asset
prices historically have always risen in advance of output prices and
the reverse, taking the stock market as the measure of asset prices.
And, of course, in that earlier period asset prices were falling very
sharply; and it turned out to be a good indicator of what was going to
be happening to output prices, deflation. Governor Lindsey mentioned
how money shrank by one-third in that period as interest rates fell,
so was policy tighter or easier?
I think it was tight.
The money
measure, though, was a very narrow measure, even narrower than today's
published Ml.
And today the very narrow measures, i.e., reserves, Ml,
[unintelligible] are growing extraordinarily rapidly. And I think we
interpret those as biasing our actions in the direction of stimulus to
the point that, if credit demand grows and short-term rates are under
upward pressure, a higher funds rate would be interpreted as a tighter
policy. I would view it as stimulative if we were lagging behind the
market.
I think there is a risk going forward as the economy gains
momentum that we could lag behind the market and our actions would be
stimulative while raising the funds rate would have the label "tight"
on it.
If we should get a good rally in the bond market--something I
hope very, very much for--and a flattening [of the yield curve] from
the long end, and if that should carry with it downward pressure on
the bill rate on a full-coupon equivalent basis toward a level well
below the funds rate, then I think it would be appropriate to lower
the funds rate and not hold it up artificially.
If the bill rate were
rallying down we would have to drain reserves and contract monetary
growth, and I wouldn't like to see that.
So, I come down on the side
of symmetric with a bias in the direction of up, especially promptly
up, if credit demands so warrant.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I was right with you absolutely all
the way as you went through your analysis right up until the end.
I
must say that although the general tone of the comments seems more
positive now than it was the last time, I do think there are some
unusual factors here. And I continue to think that the risks on
economic growth are on the down side.
You said, and I certainly
agree, that in the near term we are more likely to ease than we are to
tighten. Therefore, it seems to me that the directive ought to

-44-

5/19/92

reflect those possibilities. As a consequence, I'd be in favor of
"B," but I'd continue with asymmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I'd favor "B" asymmetric toward tightening.
I
think we've had a stimulative policy in place, no matter how you look
at it, for a long period of time. And, at a minimum, that's
consistent with recovery and expansion. Consistent with what Jerry
was saying, I also think there's a risk as this expansion progresses
that our policy, in terms of interest rates, is likely to be
inconsistent with progress toward price stability. We ought to be
mindful of that.
I was quite comfortable with what you said in
responding to Governor Lindsey, Alan.
Your earlier comments about
perhaps seeing an opportunity to coax long rates lower worried me a
little. That may be possible at points in time, but I think it's very
risky business at the level of short-term real rates we have right now
and could well backfire, for what that's worth. Finally, I could live
with your prescription of "B" symmetrical but I'd prefer "B"
asymmetrical toward tightening.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I think your proposition is reasonable and I
support it.
I must say that it's hard for me to imagine a set of
circumstances that would be convincing to tighten policy in the next
five or six weeks, given where the economy has been and where it is
likely to go and all the uncertainties about the money supply. Maybe
[that view] reflects the fact that Philadelphia is in the northeast
part of the country.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

President McTeer.

I would support your recommendation, Mr.

Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

"B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman, with your
MR. BLACK.
clarification about your reluctance to move in either direction unless
we had some confirmation in the real economy as well as the
aggregates. I think you're dead right on that and I was going to
throw that [comment] out had you not done it ahead of me.
Another
thing we need to address is this alternative sentence proposed for the
directive. That sentence indicates we are expecting at least a
moderate resumption of expansion in the aggregates, and I'd like to
see that in there rather than the old sentence that we had.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The reason for it, obviously, is that
the original procedure would have given us an odd statement.
President Syron.
I hope we need to
MR. SYRON.
I support "B" symmetric.
tighten before the next meeting; I doubt it.
Coming back to language,
on this whole issue of symmetry I remember long debates about
"would/coulds" and "could/woulds," and I find it very hard to get
excited one way or the other about a consonant.
So, in that regard, I
would go along with what you suggested.

-45-

5/19/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Well, using Jerry Jordan's model, I would have
to prefer asymmetric toward ease with the T-bill rate well below the
fed funds rate. With that model I wonder a bit how we get a clear
view of what the Treasury bill rate really is other than a prediction
of what we're likely to do next. And I do agree in general with the
notion that we are going to have to think very carefully about real
However, I simply don't see the
rates as we go through this process.
loan demand picking up again. And I don't think it's just M2; it's
total debt, as the Chairman mentioned, as well.
So, I would prefer
asymmetric toward ease in this environment but I would support
symmetric along with the stance of monitoring developments as we roar
through this 2 percent quarter!
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

As
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, I certainly would support "B."
far as symmetric or asymmetric, my preference would be toward
asymmetric.
I may have heard some good things about the real economy,
but I don't consider it all that much stronger than where we were some
months ago when we were talking about being willing to live with money
growth above the midpoint. And now suddenly we're very satisfied with
it being at the bottom [of the range] and are satisfied that [it will
be sufficient] to carry us forward. We're now relying on an
accelerating velocity that we really can't predict.
I don't see that
But I certainly can
there is all that much strength going forward.
live with symmetric language given that we would have a consultation
if there's other news coming forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

And
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" symmetric is fine with me.
I don't know when we'll have to tighten; it
just a quick footnote:
If that
could be soon; it could be later. But I'll tell you this:
judgment is reached in a context in which M2 is still on the floor,
it's going to present a mighty tricky issue in terms of formulating
the logic and the public relations to go with it.
And it's quite
possible that that could happen.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I know what the solution to that is.
Give the job to Don Kohn to get a new set of Ms! Although I will say
this:
Unless it's very close by, that would certainly indicate that
M2 is really very far off target. I was quite sympathetic with
President Hoenig's remarks about how we were talking about M2 earlier.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In the last six weeks to two months I
have been somewhat dismayed by what has been happening to M2 on the
grounds that it has been a very useful indicator for us.
And I am
increasingly coming to the conclusion that something is wrong with the
As I indicated before, whenever you get a measure [that
measure.
previously] explained several different things like the P*/price
relationship, the income/velocity relationship, the relationship of
balance sheets, and all those things [the issue is whether] you could
just draw a new line and everything would fall back into place.
It

-46-

5/19/92

really raises a question as to whether it's the single
that's out of line with everything else.

[measure]

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, there is active staff work not only
here but at the Reserve Banks looking at different measures, and it
will be a topic on the agenda at the Financial Analysis Committee
meeting in St. Louis in June; there is at least one paper on that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Finally, Governor Phillips.

I would prefer "B" asymmetric toward ease, but
MS. PHILLIPS.
I'll support symmetric recognizing that we may have to talk again in
the intermeeting period.
I'm sorry, Mr. Chairman, I asked a question but
MR. LINDSEY.
I'd just like to indicate my preference for
I never stated my view.
the record, especially since I see that my colleague to my left has me
down as favoring symmetric. My preference would be for asymmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
asymmetric.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. MULLINS.

I had put down that your preference is

Okay.
Asymmetric in which direction?

[Laughter]

He's asymmetric to you!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I tried to get a view of the Committee,
[Laughter]
and it's very clearly heavily asymmetric toward symmetric.
I think that Don's recommendation with respect to
Let me say this.
Unless I
the alternate sentence really makes a good deal of sense.
hear an objection-MR. LINDSEY.
sentence, please?
MR. BERNARD.

Could you tell us where to turn to read that
At the bottom of page 15 in the Bluebook.

MR. LINDSEY. I'm sorry, Chairman Greenspan:
reserves conditions..."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

"Contemplated

The very bottom of page 15.

MR. KOHN. I would write in there 2-1/2 and 1-1/2 percent;
don't like writing 1/4 percent on growth targets.

I

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody have any objections to the
insertion of Don's recommended language?
MR. ANGELL. I understand the "might" but do you want
"somewhat" on both sides?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have not gotten there yet.
the very last sentence, the bracketed sentence.
MR. LINDSEY.

We're on

Mr. Chairman, if the numbers are 2-1/2 and

-47-

5/19/92

1-1/2 percent, I'd question the word "resumption."
about a resumption to 2-1/2?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. SYRON.
MR. MULLINS.

No.

Are we talking

Well, that's a good point.

You're right.

This doesn't make a lot of sense.
With a resumption of growth in M2-It shows our problem.

MR. LINDSEY. We don't have growth in M2, so I suppose we are
open for a resumption.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. LINDSEY.

We might take out the words "a resumption of."
So the phrasing would be?

MR. ANGELL.

"With growth of..."

SPEAKER(?).

That's better.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Secretary read the language?

Agreed without objection.

Will the

MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions.
In the context of the Committee's
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly
lesser restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting period.
The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
growth of M2 and M3 over the period from April to June at annual rates
of about 2-1/2 and 1-1/2 percent, respectively."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Would you call the roll?

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Hoenig
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Syron

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you very much.
will be a two-day meeting, June 30th and July 1.
END OF MEETING

Our next meeting

