Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
February 4-5, 1992

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington,

D.C.,

on Tuesday,

continued on Wednesday,
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

February 4,

February 5,

1992,

1992,

at 2:30 p.m. and was

at 9:00 a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Hendricks
Hoenig
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Melzer
Mullins
Phillips
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry,
Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta,
and San Francisco, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,
Lindsey, Siegman, Simpson, and Stockton,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1.

Attended Tuesday session only.

Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman,
Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Feinman,
Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Mr. Wascher,
Senior Economist, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr.

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
Scheld, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco, Richmond,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, and
Atlanta, respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston
Mr. Guentner, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

2.
3.

Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's
discussion of the economic outlook and its longer-run
objectives for monetary and debt aggregates.
Elected for the period in 1992 until a new president of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland assumes office.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
of February 4-5, 1992
February 4, 1992--Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If we can get started....
I'd like
first to welcome Bill McDonough. Welcome, William, to your inaugural
meeting. This is our annual organization meeting. We start off with
the election of officers, and I'd like to turn the gavel over to
Governor Mullins.
MR. MULLINS. The floor is now open for nominations for the
position of Chairman of the Federal Open Market Committee.
MR. ANGELL.
Mr. Chairman, in an unplanned manner I would say
that I think it would be a wonderful idea for us to have Alan
Greenspan as Chairman. Now, would you want me to go ahead and do more
[and nominate a Vice Chairman] or do you want to do one at a time?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

No, let me request that you stop there.

You wouldn't like to take a chance on a group

ticket!
MR. MULLINS.
MR. KELLEY.

I think we need a second.
Second.

MR. MULLINS.
Without objection. The floor is now open for
nominations for the position of Vice Chairman of the Federal Open
Market Committee.
MR. KELLEY.

In like spirit I will nominate President

Corrigan.
MR. MULLINS.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. MULLINS.

Is there a second?
Second.
Without objection.

We have a new team.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I thank you and, speaking for the Vice
I now would like to have the Secretary read
Chairman, he thanks you!
the list of staff officers for potential election.
MR. BERNARD.
Secretary and Economist, Donald Kohn;
Deputy Secretary, Normand Bernard;
Assistant Secretary, Joseph Coyne;
Assistant Secretary, Gary Gillum;
General Counsel, Virgil Mattingly;
Deputy General Counsel, Ernest Patrikis;

2/4-5/92

Economist, Michael Prell;
Economist, Edwin Truman;
Associate Economists from the Board:
David Lindsey;
Larry Promisel;
Charles Siegman;
Thomas Simpson; and
David Stockton;
Associate Economists from the Federal Reserve Banks:
Alicia Munnell, proposed by President Syron;
Richard Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;
John Davis, proposed by First Vice President Hendricks;
Anatol Balbach, proposed by President Melzer; and
Thomas Davis, proposed by President Hoenig;
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are there any objections?

MR. LAWARE.

All good men and true!

MR. ANGELL.

And women!

MR. LAWARE.

And women!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If there are no objections and no
additional nominations, I will assume the list is approved.
I will
now entertain a motion regarding the Bank--which I would require to be
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York--to serve to execute transactions
for the System Open Market Account. Would somebody like to do that?
MR. LAWARE.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Is there any objection?
If not, so be
it.
We have now separately the selection of the Manager for Domestic
Operations.
Our current incumbent is Peter Sternlight, and I trust
that somebody will nominate him for reelection.
SEVERAL.

So move.

MR. MULLINS.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It has been nominated and seconded.
Is
there any objection?
If not, we move to the election of a Manager for
Foreign Operations; our [candidate] is Bill McDonough and I would seek
his nomination.
MR. MULLINS.
MR. SYRON.

So nominate.
Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
now down to the review of-MR. BERNARD.

Without objection.

The Domestic Authorization.

I think that we are

2/4-5/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Oh, yes.
Would somebody
the adoption of the Domestic Authorization?
MR. CORRIGAN.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

like to move

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Without objection.
I would now call on
Ted Truman to review the three foreign currency instruments and the
warehousing agreement.
MR. TRUMAN.
We would recommend that you approve the Foreign
Currency Authorization, the Foreign Currency Directive, and the
Procedural Instructions as they now stand.
With respect to the
warehousing authority, as we discussed at earlier meetings of the
Committee last year, the warehousing agreement with the Treasury on
behalf of the Exchange Stabilization Fund and the Treasury's general
fund is subject to annual review.
You have received a memorandum from
To summarize that memorandum, the amount of DM
me on this subject.
warehoused has been reduced from a peak of $9 billion in March of 1990
And with the prospect of a further
to the current $2 billion.

reduction in the near term to zero, it would seem appropriate to us to
reduce the size of the arrangement from the current $10 billion to the
more historically normal level of $5 billion; that level prevailed
Therefore, I recommended a renewal of that size
from 1978 to 1989.
and Bill McDonough concurs with that recommendation.
First, if the Exchange
I would note three points.
Stabilization Fund repurchases the remaining $2 billion, as we assume
and expect it will, its dollar position will be relatively low, so we
Secondly, the Treasury has
might have to reverse that later.
expressed some anxiety that conditions could change such that they
might want to warehouse more than $5 billion. In staff conversations
with the Treasury, we noted that the size of the arrangement has been
increased in the past and we assured them that the Committee is
prepared to consider any reasonable request for changes in the future.
Lastly, Bill McDonough and I have told the Treasury that once the $2
billion is repurchased, the terms of the arrangement should be
In
adjusted marginally to conform more closely to market practice.
the future, the forward "leg" would be at a forward market rate rather
It basically equalizes
This seems more sensible.
than being flat.
our interest returns and our foregone earnings. The Treasury staff
has agreed in principle to this change and has agreed that it is
appropriate to make the change not in the middle of an arrangement but
I'd be pleased to answer any
once we've gotten it cleaned away.
questions.

someone

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[make a motion]?

Are there any questions?

If not, would

MR. ANGELL. I would be happy to move the adoption of the
proposals that have been presented by Mr. Truman. And I would like to
express appreciation and gratitude that we're back to [an authorized
level of] $5 billion and [the amount warehoused] will not be close to
that amount.

2/4-5/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SEVERAL.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
favor say "aye."
SEVERAL.

Is there a second?

Any further discussion?

If not, all in

Aye.

None
[Secretary's note:
Opposed?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
We're now up to approval of the minutes
heard.]
The "ayes" have it.
Would somebody like to move it?
of the meeting of December 17.
Move it.

MR. CORRIGAN.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without exception. We'll now move to
foreign currency operations and I call on Mr. McDonough.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr. McDonough?

I don't
MR. SYRON.
I'm just curious about the intervention.
have any real problem with it, but could you give us a little more
background on what was going on at the time?
Were the markets felt to
What was happening that precipitated the
be particularly disorderly?
decision to intervene at that particular point in time, presuming that
we don't have a target?
MR. MCDONOUGH. The dollar had rallied very strongly and very
quickly, as I mentioned, almost certainly basically on short covering.
And that strength had continued through Thursday, January 16th.
In
the morning we had a rather [sloppy] market because of the questioning
At that time the Treasury
of how best to interpret the trade figures.
expressed a very strong view that it was "appropriate," as they put
it, to cap the dollar and to adjust it downward somewhat.
This had been discussed
MR. TRUMAN.
One additional point:
at least in principle the day before in the context of a strong
The ambiguity came when we had the
dollar--the dollar having gone up.
market that we had on Friday. On our part we felt that since the
dollar was backing off, the Treasury probably would no longer be
interested [in intervening].
But they turned out to be interested and
we had to confront the question of whether to go along; we felt that
on balance it was better to go along.
MR. SYRON.

I think I understand why we did it.

MR. KELLEY.

That puts you ahead of the rest of us!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?
minute to review what occurred at the G-7 meeting.
MR. CORRIGAN.

Let me take a

We need a motion on the transactions.

-5-

2/4-5/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

That's a nice idea.

I will move it.
Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

This

is a motion to

ratify the actions

of-MR. MCDONOUGH.
To ratify the Federal Reserve sale of $25
million against yen on January 17th.
That was our only operation on
behalf of the Federal Reserve during the period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It has been moved and
objection?
If not, I take it that is approved.

seconded.

Mr. Chairman, we've already talked about
MR. ANGELL.
let's just go ahead and vote for it anyway!
[Laughter]

Any

it,

but

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let me just take a minute to update you
on the G-7 meeting.
That meeting obviously comes out of the Tokyo
meeting between President Bush and Prime Minister Miazawa in which, as
you may recall, there was a communique which specified that they were
jointly in agreement on the issue of a "growth agenda" without
There was in the
specifying particularly what that concept meant.
context of those discussions a reaching out to the other members of
the G-7 to join them in that particular view of the world.
And the
Treasury decided that a meeting of the G-7 finance ministers and
central bank governors would be the ideal vehicle by which that could
occur.
So the meeting was planned and as the days went on, in
endeavoring to create the usual advance communique, it became fairly
clear that uniformity of view was not exactly how one would describe
the nature of those negotiations.
As a consequence of that at the end we all moved
up to Garden City.
It turned out that while the Treasury, I think,
was quite successful in moving its broad philosophy of growth, it
nonetheless acquiesced in language which very specifically maintained
the long term anti-inflationary posture of the G-7 and the need to
continue not to dissipate the gains that have been made against
Discussions on potential intervention really got very
inflation.
little support and, as Bill McDonough indicated, the communique in
that regard was relatively noncommittal.
We discussed the Soviet--or I should say the former Soviet-The issue of a
republics and their problems a good deal.
stabilization fund was raised by
It got remarkably
little support in the group; that never really proceeded very far.
Although I suspect there is considerable latent support within the
group to do something when the time is right, nobody at that meeting
really held the view that the timing was such as to make it
particularly useful.
As a consequence, the communique ended up with a
[statement in] support of the growth scenario promulgated in Tokyo and
a number of individual country reports on their specific policies
which struck me very much as national travel agencies describing the
goodies of coming to visit.
But nothing much else was involved.
I
think it was a harmonious meeting, certainly compared to the one in
It did have a significant element in that there was a very
Bangkok.

2/4-5/92

clear tilt in the basic philosophy of that group, which I must tell
you I would more readily describe as the views of the finance
ministers because we central bankers were sitting there on our hands
to a large extent. The substance beyond the growth area was mainly in
the discussion of the Soviet quota in the IMF; there was considerable
discussion of it.
It was assumed that a specific conclusion would not
be reached except that obviously there [would be] discussions leading
up to the Interim Committee meeting. Is that in April, Ted?
MR. TRUMAN.

Late April.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That meeting would bring that to
fruition. There was very strong support for a fairly quick resolution
of the Russian federation's application and that of several of the
other republics. That was pretty much all that was involved in the
meeting. It was not one of the more significant endeavors on the part
of the G-7, but certain things were accomplished.
Any questions?
I'd be glad to entertain them.
now move on to the Domestic Desk and Peter Sternlight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

If not, we'll

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr. Sternlight?

MR. PARRY. With regard to the increase in long-term rates,
all of the factors you cited are domestic in nature. Did market
participants ever refer to any international considerations that might
have been placing some upward pressure on rates?
MR. STERNLIGHT. They did on occasion, President Parry. I
perhaps should have mentioned that, although it did not seem to be a
big factor in the recent period. But in the fairly recent past I was
hearing as one reason for the rise in domestic long-term interest
rates the competitive pull particularly of German rates.
MR. TRUMAN. Most German interest rates were down over the
period since early January.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?
If not, would
somebody like to move to ratify the actions since the previous
meeting?
MR. CORRIGAN.

Move it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on to
the Chart Show with Messrs. Prell, Simpson, and Truman.
MESSRS. PRELL, SIMPSON and TRUMAN.
Appendix.]

[Statements--see

2/4-5/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That report was pretty impressive,
gentlemen. Questions for any of them?
MR. PARRY. One of the characteristics of the forecast is
that the interest sensitivity of real spending is different than I
Could you indicate how much of a
think traditional elasticities are.
difference there is and whether you assume that the historical
difference between those elasticities has disappeared over the period?
It seems to be a big factor in the forecast, for example in components
such as commercial office space.
MR. PRELL. Well, that very clearly is a deviation from past
norms of cyclical behavior, and I think it does reflect an unusually
low degree of interest sensitivity. Basically, we think that process
has been short-circuited by the buildup of so huge a stock of
unoccupied buildings. Traditionally there has been a modest but
significant contribution from nonresidential construction in the first
Outside of that area, there are
couple of years of business upturns.
indications--and we've tried to gauge this econometrically--that
It's a
housing may be less interest sensitive than it once was.
little hard to disentangle historically because of the
disintermediation or reintermediation with segmented mortgage markets
that produced a credit rationing effect that outweighed whatever
So, one has to disentangle that.
interest rates effects there were.
There is also more reliance than in the past on adjustable rate
mortgages, which scarcely existed earlier; and that conceivably may
affect interest sensitivity. So, we may not have as great an interest
sensitivity in the housing sector as one might expect. But, indeed,
our models have been surprised at the weakness of residential
construction. And that may be partly a matter of gauging the
It is quite conceivable that in
perceived real cost of home buying.
the past year or so people have perceived the prospect of capital loss
as being much greater than any trend in prices over recent years,
which is the normal effect that the models capture. I think those are
It's possible, too, that inventories don't have a
the major areas.
And in the
greater interest sensitivity than we have built into this.
consumer durables area, we're torn between a couple of considerations:
(1) the interest sensitivity probably isn't all that high to begin
with; and (2) the movements of consumer loan rates haven't been
enormous, but on an after tax basis they have moved somewhat
On the other hand, somebody looking at
perversely in recent years.
the option of whether to invest in a consumer durable with the
expectation of a return of flow of services versus the 3 or 4 percent
rate earned on a deposit might feel that isn't a bad deal and might be
stimulated to spend a little more than otherwise.
On the issue of elasticities, my recollection is
MR. PARRY.
that the growth of imports is a little slower than one normally would
Is that correct that the income
expect, particularly in 1993.
elasticities have been lower?
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, the models will give you a higher income
elasticity. However, a statistical test in which we essentially reestimated the elasticities suggested that those elasticities have come
down over time pretty much like the [actual behavior] and are closer
to an elasticity of one on both the export and import sides.
Therefore, we have in the forecast a relatively modest pickup in the
real [import] component.

2/4-5/92

MR. PARRY.

That's an interesting development.

MR. TRUMAN. In general imports have been performing
throughout the last several years at a lower level than we had
anticipated. And those two things together plus the other factor,
which [has been] important for a number of years, led us to put in a
small adjustment [unintelligible].
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

MR. KEEHN. Mike, a curiosity question on productivity as
Am I right that overall productivity includes
depicted in Chart 14:
manufacturing and services?
MR. PRELL.

Yes.

MR. KEEHN. The question relates to my impression that on the
manufacturing side productivity seems to have been pretty good over
the [past] few years and, therefore, in an inflationary sense it has
been a constructive thing. Am I right about that?
MR. PRELL. Yes, indeed. In the 1980s there was a distinct
improvement in productivity performance in manufacturing. The
residual has not shown that kind of improvement, and basically our
expectation is that we will continue to see manufacturing do well in
terms of gains in output per hour and that probably we will see the
I would
remainder of the economy improve its performance somewhat.
caution, however, that it's not so clear that the developments we've
been seeing recently--the restructuring--constitute a vastly different
So at this point I
kind of event than we have seen in other cycles.
think one should be cautious in anticipating a really radical shift in
productivity gains.
MR. SYRON. A question for Tom Simpson:
In your discussion,
you talked about the balance sheet restructurings of both households
This is not a well-defined question, but do we have
and corporations.
some notion even in a generalized sense of how much more desire there
I'm trying to get to how much intermediated
might be to do that?
versus nonintermediated funds are going to the open market in this
area with some vague presumption of conditions in the market remaining
about as they are now.
MR. SIMPSON. Well, it's really hard to pinpoint.
In dealing
with the corporate sector, we certainly hear a lot of stories about
And the
firms wanting to strengthen their balance sheets.
announcements of reverse LBOs and so forth suggest that there still is
more room to go in that area. What is going to constitute the new
norm once all this adjustment occurs is an open question. Personally,
I'm not so sure they will go back to the leveraging ratios of the late
'70s or early '80s. The household sector is even a little more
We do hear a lot of stories about individuals
difficult to evaluate.
straining under the weight of their debt burdens and holding the line
and restraining themselves. But there again, I'm just not sure-MR. KOHN. In terms of intermediation and [unintelligible]
depositories, which is part of what I thought you were getting at, we
have this securitization process for mortgages, which has been
underway for a while but has certainly gotten going on consumer debts.

2/4-5/92

So, the relative contribution of depository institutions to the whole
credit flow has been depressed by their own choice through this
securitization process. Other intermediaries are taking it.
I was also trying to get at some of the cyclical
MR. SYRON.
aspects of it in the short and intermediate run, which I think Tom has
answered as well, so-MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, we've just received auto sales
For those of you who want to be brought up to the very minute,
data.
there was some improvement in the last 10 days of January. On our
seasonal adjustment factors auto sales were 6-1/4 million at an annual
So we ended the
rate with almost 4 million in sales of light trucks.
month at 5.9 million autos sold and 3.6 million trucks sold; that's a
little better picture than we saw in the first 20 days of January.
The cars were close to the December rate; trucks were off a bit; you
So, I think
will recall that the year-end incentives distorted it.
we're on a steady-as-you-go [course] in the motor vehicle market.
MR. HOENIG. Mike, I want to ask something relating to the
single-family residential area because it's an important part of the
Given the comments on restructuring
projections as we come into 1992.
of debt that have been made and some of the demographics, can you
explain to me again why we're going to have such a strong residential
recovery even without the fiscal stimulus which, if I understand it,
[Your forecast] seems very
was not part of this projection?
optimistic to me.
MR. PRELL. Well, it's very difficult to get a precise fix on
We know something about the demographic
underlying longer-run trends.
It's certainly clear that the relevant population is
situation.
It's also clear
growing more slowly than it was several years ago.
that if past patterns hold, that would favor single-family relative to
multifamily construction because people are passing into years where
home ownership rates typically rise very markedly. We think we have
been below the longer-run trend recently and that we're going to move
up relative to that trend--conceivably to around trend or a bit above
it--in response to what is much enhanced affordability. We've had a
very distinct improvement for people who want to buy houses, and the
signs are that there is some response already in train here. We've
raised our forecast since the last meeting despite no change, really,
It just appeared to us that people
in our mortgage rate assumptions.
have been responding more than we had anticipated previously and that
with perhaps a small degree of optimism we could carry that through
the forecast period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Tom.

MR. MELZER. Ted, I don't know quite what to make of this,
but it seems as if your projection of consumer prices in the G-7
countries represents an extraordinary convergence of inflation rates
And
and even of real output. Am I right in making that observation?
if so, what do you think the implications of that are for exchange
rates and so forth?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I think you're right in making that
inference; there probably is some degree to which we have a natural
After we
convergence of these things at least on the inflation side.

2/4-5/92

-10-

put all this together, we noticed that several of the 1992 numbers on
that chart are at 3.0 percent.
I think that reflected a reluctance to
put "2" [as the first] number.
On the growth side, it seems to me
that there is a convergence, but the movement is from different
directions.
Germany and Japan essentially are moving down and the
weaker economies are moving up [in their respective growth rates].
In
some sense that reflects the fact that a period in which we've had
quite a lot of divergence in the experience and the needs of the
different G-7 countries is coming to an end, though we end up with a
forecast in which certainly for the United Kingdom and Canada growth
still remains pretty weak relative to potential. As far as the
exchange rates are concerned, to the extent that we do have both this
convergence on the inflation side and less divergence in terms of
certain short-run macroeconomic policy needs, it would seem to me that
we're likely to have less shocks, if you want to put it that way,
coming from abrupt shifts in policy over this period.
I suppose the
one set of question marks associated with this is that we're in a
period, taking the two-year period as a whole, in which we have not
only here but abroad--in Canada, the United Kingdom, France, and
Japan--a lot of elections.
If you put that all together, we could
have some political shocks.
In the case of the United Kingdom, I
don't think we will see a fundamentally different policy even if the
Tories should lose because Labor is as committed to staying in the ERM
as the conservatives are and that is going to constrain monetary
policy.
Plus they think things are so bad that they would undertake
once and for all to make exchange rate adjustments.
It's uncertain
what that may mean in terms of macro policy. And on the fiscal side
they may move from a situation in which they have quite a lot of room
to maneuver to one in which they really don't have that much anymore;
but they're pretty much boxed in, even if there is a change in
governments.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Further questions?
If not, let me
mention Mike Prell's insistence that any changes in your forecasts
arrive by the end of this week. Who would like to start the tour de
table?
MR. PARRY.
I'd be happy to, Mr. Chairman.
Economic weakness
persists in the Twelfth District economy, unfortunately led by a
worsening California economy.
California continues to report
declining employment in nearly all sectors. Weakness is most
pronounced in construction and also in manufacturing.
In 1991
construction employment fell in excess of 7 percent, and we actually
had accelerating declines in the fourth quarter. Manufacturing showed
a similar pattern, with employment declines of about 4.4 percent in
1991.
I also have to point out that additional defense cuts are
expected in 1992.
Retail trade activity is also off sharply.
Searching for a positive sign in the California economy, I was able to
come up with one, and that is in real estate activity, at least
residential, where median house prices actually have not fallen and
resale activity has risen in several major markets.
Even in Los
Angeles, looking at year-over-year comparisons for single-family
houses, the prices seem to be very similar to what they were a year
ago. Throughout the rest of the District conditions are clearly
mixed. Two of the largest of the remaining states, Arizona and
Washington, are showing weakness.
The state of Washington, which has
had quite a few years of uninterrupted prosperity, actually showed a
loss of employment in 1991.
And Arizona has shown considerable

2/4-5/92

-11-

weakness in the last four months.
Other states--Alaska, Hawaii, and
Oregon--are relatively sluggish. The only two states in our District
that have shown strong growth are Idaho and Utah; of course, both of
them are quite small in terms of the number of residents.
Turning to the national outlook, we expect the economy to
expand only slightly in the current quarter, which would mean we might
see some further declines in the near term.
In the quarters to
follow, growth is expected to rise at around a 3 percent rate.
Our
major sources of strength come from inventories in the interestsensitive sectors of the economy, although we would certainly
subscribe to the Greenbook's expectations with regard to reduced
interest sensitivity in most sectors.
I do feel, however, that there
is a rather large band of uncertainty encompassing both sides of this
forecast. Nevertheless, the outlook for inflation continues to be
encouraging. And consistent with a downward trend in underlying
inflation, we expect to see a reduction in most major inflation
measures this year compared to 1991.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.
Mr. Chairman, our forecast is quite close to the
staff forecast for 1992.
Indeed, we probably are closer now than we
have been in a while.
Our outlook for both inflation and unemployment
is just a little lower, but the differences aren' t really worth
talking about.
With regard to the District, in the period since the last
meeting of the Committee, I think the District economy really has
weakened.
This seemed particularly true as we approached and then
went through the year-end period.
In some respects, I think the
District just caught up with the conditions that were prevalent around
the country. The employment situation is perhaps the most evident
indicator of that.
Total payroll employment in the District declined
in December, and the District unemployment rate went up to 7-1/2
percent; that's the highest level we've had since May of 1986.
Illinois really did stand out in that; its unemployment rate went up
to 9.3 percent and that got a lot of attention. There are some
special factors behind that; nonetheless, it was a very, very
significant increase in the level of unemployment in Illinois. And
that puts us, I believe, at the top of the industrial states.
Announcements of employment reductions, closings, early retirement
programs, and the like, are continuing at what seems to me to be a
very disturbing rate.
Since the year-end, I've been trying to look
around pretty hard for better news and I have to admit it is a bit
scarce.
I will say that there are some categories in which there are
The steel
signs, if not of improvement, at least of stabilization.
business is perhaps in that category. One large manufacturer in our
area is clearly operating at a 72 to 73 percent rate, but its current
order rate is a little higher, coming in at about 75 percent.
So,
that should mean their total production will go up a bit. And the
forecast for shipments this year is a little higher than was the case
last year.
In the steel industry, though, the pricing is stable,
which from their point of view means that it is just terrible. Their
prices currently are generally at about the level that they were in
1980-81 on a nominal basis. On an inflation-adjusted basis that means
they're about 30 percent under that level.
The outlook for heavy
trucks also is just a bit better; sales are expected to be some 5 to 6

2/4-5/92

-12-

But I will say that
percent higher this year compared to last year.
that improvement is very much a forecast for the second half of the
year; there's an awful lot of focus in the District on the second half
versus the first half. Machine tool orders increased in December;
that was particularly true for metal cutting tools, which should mean
that those industries will be producing at higher levels.
Also, I think there's something of a brighter note on the
retail front.
One specialty retailer I talked to said that in the
early part of January their sales around the country were up some 14
to 18 percent. Another very major retailer in the area said they had
a good January; their sales for the full month were 17 percent over
last year.
On a cautionary note, though, last January sales were very
badly affected, of course, by the so-called CNN factor. And all the
retailers say that discounting continues to be just very, very tough.
In the automotive business, though, as Mike has said, the last 10 days
Still, for January as a whole those sales came
were a little better.
in a bit lower than the earlier forecast.
I think that means that the
first-quarter production schedules are at further risk.
But one
manufacturer that I talked to said that they had seen some improvement
in the order rate from dealers, which is something I've been looking
at pretty carefully. And, indeed, last week they had a very
significant increase in the order rate from their dealers.
They're
not quite sure why. If that is maintained, then their production
schedules in the first quarter might be okay.
In the agricultural sector, the equipment business has hit a
rough spot.
One major manufacturer has had a decline in sales of
major implements of some 24 percent over the last couple of months.
There's a comparison issue there, but they still are down very
significantly; the reason is supposedly that the farmers are looking
I do
at the ITC and are going to hold off until that gets clarified.
think that for many of the businesses in our District, this ITC
uncertainty is going to be something of wild card.
In an overall context, while I can't find people whose
attitudes are particularly positive, nonetheless some of the very
heavy depression that was rather pervasive when we last met has
passed, and I do think our policy change in December had an important
effect on that.
On the pricing front, the outlook continues to be positive.
Price increases just
The competitive conditions speak for themselves:
don't stick; and wage increases, particularly in manufacturing, are
modest and can be dealt with through productivity improvements.
Therefore, I think the staff forecast on inflation is very realistic.
Also, I think the restraint on credit extensions by banks is beginning
to stabilize. As nonperforming loan problems begin to unwind here and
capital ratios continue to improve, lending attitudes are getting just
It hasn't shown up in the numbers yet, but my
a bit more expansive.
sense is that the lending officers are being encouraged to go out and
find good loans, and I certainly would want to emphasize the "good" in
that comment. Net, I think the risks continue to be on the down side
in terms of overall economic activity, but I do think, though it's
hard to give you statistical evidence of it, that there has been at
least a mini-improvement on balance from the last meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

2/4-5/92

-13-

MR. ANGELL.
progressed?

Si, has the Caterpillar labor negotiation

MR. KEEHN.
It has not; it has gotten worse.
Caterpillar, of
course, built up very large inventories going into the strike. And
because of the low sales level they are still very much working off
those inventories. And the union has an enormous strike fund.
This
is getting to be tougher; they are not talking, and it's difficult to
see a constructive way out of this one.
MR. ANGELL.

What are the union wage demands?

MR. KEEHN. It's not so much wages as it is the issue of [the
industry] pattern. The UAW settled with Deere and is insisting on the
Caterpillar is saying they ship
same settlement out of Caterpillar.
to different industries and face different competitive factors, and
they cannot settle on the [basis of the] Deere package. Again, it's
the pattern that is the ultimate issue here.
MR. ANGELL.
It would seem, with farm sales down 24 percent,
that maybe Deere made a mistake also.
MR. KEEHN. Well, Deere had a bad [strike] the last time and
went into this one deciding they were going to find a way of settling.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, activity in the Atlanta
District has softened since the last time we met, but I'm happy to say
that there seems to have been quite a turnaround in expectations.
Most of the contacts we've talked to expect an upturn, although a
modest one, in the spring. On the manufacturing side, even though
activity slowed in the last few months of 1991, a large number of
firms that we surveyed recently indicated that they expect an increase
in production and shipments as well as in orders over the next six
months.
We've had informal contacts with retailers, and they're
suggesting a similar outlook. Retail sales were somewhat better in
January; that [improvement] was concentrated in nondurables.
Retailers continue to be very cautious about their inventory levels.
One bright spot in the District that was picked up for the nation in
Mike Prell's report is the sale of single-family homes. This has been
true across the District generally and is concentrated in the lower to
the mid-price range.
And that obviously has implications for durable
sales, which I mentioned. Another positive factor in the Atlanta
District has been a rise in convention bookings as well as in the
number of visitors and tourism. Foreign tourism in particular is
expected to benefit from the weak dollar.
The agricultural sector is generally favorable, but the
In
situation is really quite different for the energy sector.
December, for example, Louisiana operated 40 percent fewer rigs than a
The number for the country as a whole is 30 percent
year earlier.
less.
This is giving rise to continuing layoffs in the District in
that industry. Banking contacts are reporting very weak loan demand,
Loan officers are out there
as was suggested a few minutes ago.
looking for good credits; the problem is that they're not finding very
many good credits. The banks also are reporting that they're not
changing their underwriting standards at all, and some of them are

2/4-5/92

-14-

reporting that there has been really no change in the regulatory
pressure that they had seen earlier on.
So, in general, while things
have softened, the attitudinal situation is considerably better than
it was six or eight weeks ago.
With respect to the national outlook, we're reasonably close
to the Greenbook in terms of the GDP forecast. Although we see a
little more strength in the first half of '92 and somewhat less growth
as time goes on, the GDP forecasts pretty much converge.
Our outlook
for inflation is somewhat less optimistic. We may indeed get the good
results that the staff is forecasting in the Greenbook, but I think
the risk on inflation is on the up side.
My hunch is, although our
forecast and the staff forecast are based on no fiscal change, that
we're going to get fiscal stimulus probably above what the President
has suggested. And that suggests to me that the GDP forecasts are
probably on the low side; if we get that fiscal stimulus, the economy
will probably do better.
Having said that, I do think our decision
today should be based on our assessment of what the situation is going
to be ex fiscal policy. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I don't have much to add to this
very excellent presentation the staff gave us and the fine coverage in
the Greenbook.
Our projections really are not significantly
different.
We do expect a little more real growth and a little
greater slowing in the rate of inflation.
But the broad profile is
pretty much the same, with some pickup in the rate of increase of the
recovery in the second quarter--but only to a very moderate rate in
comparison with what has happened in past recoveries--and continued
deceleration in core inflation, even though we are projecting that the
overall CPI will come in a tad higher this year than it did last year.
Insofar as the risks of error are concerned, I guess a carefully
reasoned analysis would say that they are about equal on both sides.
Certainly, there are some downside risks:
the heavy overhang of
commercial real estate; the corporate restructuring; the balance sheet
adjustments that are taking place; the restraint on credit.
Also, all
these temporary dislocations that have taken place as a result of
declining rates of inflation could produce another year of lower-thanexpected growth.
But on the other side of that, I think the substantial
further easing in monetary policy we engineered in November-December
could easily produce a more rapid recovery than we are expecting here,
particularly if a fiscal package is enacted early in the year or
relatively early in the year.
For what it's worth, my instinct is
that the upside risk is probably a little greater than the downside
risk mainly because of the actions that we took in the fourth quarter.
We engineered a very significant easing in policy; it has not at this
point had a very positive effect upon the economy; the stock market
really seems to think [it will] over the next several quarters.
Moreover, we're seeing a decided change in the comments that we hear
from our contacts around the District.
There is not much hard
evidence yet that things really have improved, but the outlook for the
next six months or so is decidedly better than it has been over the
several times we've made contacts; it's quite a shift away from what
we heard [unintelligible].
It always seems to me that the pessimism
is the greatest right at the bottom of a recession. So, since it

2/4-5/92

-15-

looks a little better now than it did a while back, I hope that means
that we're beginning to come out of this a little faster than most
people seem to think.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
bottom of the recession!

It could also mean we're not at the

MR. BLACK. I hope it doesn't get any worse than it is now.
It would really be bad.
It's the worst I've ever seen since the '30s
and I don't know very much about that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
At a January 24
meeting of the Fourth District round table, economists agreed that the
economy will be flat again this quarter but will improve throughout
Similar to the staff forecast, the group of
the remainder of 1992.
economists expects 6 percent growth in nominal GDP over the next four
quarters, and that's about evenly divided between output and prices.
They pointed out that structural changes in the economy, such as
corrections in overcapacity in retail and banking and long-term
adjustments in the automobile and computer industries, are restraining
the recovery. With respect to our projections, they are very close to
those included in the Greenbook.
Currently, activity in the District is mixed and has perhaps
lost a little ground in terms of the momentum it enjoyed in recent
Nonfarm payroll employment fell in January after three
months.
successive monthly increases.
Our unemployment rate rose 1 point to
6.6 percent but is still, of course, below the national average.
Construction contracts, retail sales, and manufacturing production all
outperformed the nation through late 1991. Auto production remains
weaker than expected, although the auto economists who participated in
the round table still believe that production this year will be at
[They base that assessment]
least 10 percent higher than last year.
on the strength of sales and inventories that they feel are a little
better than they originally had expected. Auto suppliers note that
orders softened late last year, but Goodyear has just announced a
recall of 300 workers because of good demand for replacement tires.
Steel operating rates at nearly 80 percent of capacity are expected to
ease a little this quarter in the view of those economists because of
The signals from capital goods producers
the recent let-up in orders.
are also mixed.
Those sensitive to auto and truck production note
easing in orders, but the industrial machinery and equipment producers
report that orders are either flat or, in the case of machine tools,
rising. The capital spending outlook for 1992 is also mixed. More
durable goods producers plan either the same or higher levels of
spending than those who plan cutbacks, but petroleum producers,
retailers, and real estate developers will cut spending. Although the
commercial real estate markets in the Fourth District are not as soft
as in some other areas of the country, developers of shopping centers
and office buildings are concerned about too much capacity.
Inadequate financing and cash flow have put several projects on hold
in Ohio, New York, and California.
It appears to us that we are perhaps at the threshold of an
Of course, we thought that was the case last
expanding economy.
summer.
We are encouraged by the absence of price pressures and by

2/4-5/92

-16-

the modest 2 percent increase in the price deflator again last
quarter. And we expect continued moderate inflation in the months
ahead.
That concludes my report.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the First District
we had thought that the economy was on the verge of rebounding but now
it seems perhaps to be stalling a little again. The sector where
that's coming from is the manufacturing sector. A significant amount
of that has to do with defense, and it's probably a long-term
structural adjustment.
Defense is an extraordinarily important
industry in Connecticut; on a per capita basis it dwarfs even
California.
So, everyone wants peace to break out as it affects
someone else's factory; but we know we're going to have a lot of cuts
there and it's causing a fair amount of uncertainty for the District.
Also, the people who produce the capital spending more generally are
finding that their customers are concerned. With respect to
manufacturing in softer goods, several discount retailers have told us
they've had calls from producers saying: "Can you take things from us
now because we're starting to be concerned about cash pressures and
our inventories are building a little more than we'd like?"
For the
retail sector, the post-Christmas period has been a little better than
expected, as was the Christmas period.
So, that is relatively good
news.
In the banking sector, loan demand for "acceptable" loans is
still weak.
Several banks have indicated that they are going to be
more cautious as a result of the recent legislation in terms of prompt
progressive intervention and capital standards. We are seeing the
beginning of some improvement in nonperforming loans; the level of
nonperforming loans has actually dropped slightly at the margin. And
that is consistent with what has been talked about in other Districts.
We have seen some pickup in residential construction in single-family
homes even in New England; I'm not quite sure who is going to buy
them, but I'm told that they are all contracted for before the
[shovel] goes in the ground. Again, I'm not sure what the reason is,
but the mood is generally improved somewhat as well.
I think part of
it has to do with our December cut [in rates]; it is being seen as a
watershed event to some extent.
But people are saying:
"Well, it has
to get better, and we expect it will get better in the spring."
As far as the nation goes, our own forecast would be quite
similar to the Greenbook forecast, though I must confess not
necessarily on the same policy assumption that's embedded in the
Greenbook.
I don't mean that as a criticism of the Greenbook; I
realize the institutional constraints. But I think we do have to take
into consideration that a forecast based on the "no change" approach
to policy, which has become more of a standard assumption in the
Greenbook, may have been biased toward optimism as we've gone through
these periods.
I realize looking immediately ahead that we do have
this unknown in fiscal policy out there.
I was very interested in
Mike's comments that even the things that have been talked about now-the presumption that this [fiscal package] doesn't get "Christmastreed" too badly--would not have a dramatic effect.
At any rate,
that's something that we can't anticipate very well at this point.
The one place where our forecast does differ is with respect to the
unemployment rate. For any given level of GDP, we would have a
slightly higher unemployment rate forecast than what is reflected in
the chart.
I think that goes back to our own little model [at the

-17-

2/4-5/92

Bank] where we have the labor force increasing slightly more than is
anticipated in the Greenbook forecast. We think that could add as
much as a couple of tenths in some of the intermediate periods and,
consistent with that, we'd be somewhat more optimistic on inflation.
To sum up, on balance we think that the risks still are on
the down side.
One reason has to do with the consumer and the
necessity of forecasting that we're going to see a snapback in
consumption to some extent.
If that doesn't happen, I have a fear
about what that would mean for inventory behavior and what that
[implies in turn].
We've obviously made an enormous amount of
progress on inflation and we don't want to give that up. But
consistent with that, we've also seen this restructuring phenomenon
that is going on, which will be very beneficial for productivity in
the longer run.
And it seems to me that the proper role of policy, as
others have said, is to "facilitate" that restructuring phenomenon.
I
do have a concern that were we to see a significant further slowing in
the economy, we'd see demands for all kinds of protectionism, not just
in the international trade sense but in a slowing down of the
restructuring process in many industries.
That may be because I come
from a District where a lot of people have been restructured out and
I'm very sensitive to it.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. In terms of the outlook, our view is similar to
the Board staff's.
We're somewhat more positive on real growth and
right in the middle of the central tendency as far as inflation, as
measured by the CPI, goes. But what I want to comment on are the
assumptions. It's interesting how two people can look at the same
thing in different ways. Dick was worried about an unchanged interest
rate [assumption] and I'm worried about what I think is another policy
assumption implicit in there!
[Laughter]
When we do our forecast
further out--this would have very little impact on '92--our
presumption is that at some point, not in the reasonably near future
but in the course of this year, we'd get back to Ml growth of 4 to 5
percent. We don't run our projection solely on that; there's a lot of
judgment implied.
But implicit in the policy assumptions in the
Greenbook and the Bluebook is an 11 percent plus growth rate in Ml for
all of 1992.
Now, I guess my view is that an unchanged interest rate
is not necessarily an unchanged monetary policy.
If we're pegging an
interest rate and we have an economy that is picking up and there is
greater demand for credit and associated with that transaction
balances are created, we have to supply the reserves.
So, my view is
--though some things could occur in the short run to disturb this-that over longer periods of time if we're fostering growth in reserves
and narrow money at double-digit rates, that's going to come back to
roost in terms of higher inflation. So, in terms of underlying
assumptions looking further out, there are considerable differences.
The other thing in this context that troubles me in general is that
this can go on with an apparently benign policy as far as M2 is
concerned because only 25 percent of M2 is comprised of the Ml
component; 75 percent is in the non-Mi components. And special
factors will hold the growth of those non-M1 components probably to
zero in 1992.
So, we can sit there with 10 percent Ml growth and have
M2 growing at 2-1/2 percent. Enough about that now, but I think we
had the same sort of problem between the middle of '88 and the middle
of '89 in reverse in essence, where M2 looked as if it was growing

2/4-5/92

-18-

We were comfortable with
fast enough at a rate of about 4 percent.
that, but in fact what we were doing to maintain our pegged funds
rate--which arguably was perhaps too high--at those levels was that we
were pulling out reserves. Ml declined and we pulled out reserves
So, I
over that one-year period at an annual rate of 3.2 percent.
think those are important considerations as we look ahead to tomorrow.

In terms of the District, I didn't go first today--that
didn't do any good last time--but the numbers still look pretty good.
Non-agricultural payrolls in the most recent period for which we have
numbers were growing at 1.3 percent compared to 0.3 percent
nationally, and we're seeing that growth both in [services and goodsproducing industries], with particular strength in food and kindred
products and in textiles.
I continue to hear this anecdotal story
about textile mills running flat out [in our District]; it's partly a
Inventories have been run down
delivery problem as I understand it.
to the point where wholesalers and retailers can't wait for foreign
As far
deliveries so domestic mills are benefiting in the short run.
as construction goes, residential construction has been particularly
Contracts have been growing at twice the
strong over the last year.
Nonresidential construction is off
national rate over that period.
over the year and most recently, but it's off I would say modestly-about 4 percent over the course of the year--and there are no signs of
I picked up the same thing
further declines at least at the moment.
Bob Black did on the anecdotal side.
Over the last two or three weeks
for the first time in many months, I have started to hear some
positive comments from people in the housing area, from a couple of
bankers talking about a pickup in loan demand both in the consumer and
commercial areas, and also from the retailing side. A major national
retailer based in St. Louis saw activity pick up in the week or two
before Christmas and that pickup has been sustained throughout
January. At the same time they point out that this is a very
promotional period in terms of prices and that, as Si mentioned, last
year is really a bad benchmark. But they're doing better than their
plan. Anyway, District-wise, the story is really about the same as I
laid out last time. At the moment things look pretty good.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. My assessment of the District economy is that
it's just bumping along the bottom. I don't think there are any firm
trends, up or down.
But I, too, have picked up in recent weeks
Some is from
perhaps just a tad of improvement in sentiment.
If you
retailing, some from banking, and some from the housing area.
didn't want to see it, I don't think you'd see it; it's not a big
deal, just a little here and there. You would have to put your finger
on the pulse; it's just a sense, and I think that's a positive sign.
As far as the nation goes, I think the Greenbook is about
right. That forecast is the most likely outcome and I think it's well
reasoned. Nonetheless, it could be wrong and we could relive what we
went through last year.
I just put my finger in the air and came up
with my own assessment, which is that there's probably about a 60-65
percent chance that we will get an expansion along the lines the
Greenbook sees.
But I think there's maybe a 25 or 30 percent chance
that we won't and that we could see a repeat of last year, with the
So,
balance [of risks] being that we could get a stronger expansion.

2/4-5/92

-19-

it's a profile that has the odds favoring an upswing but enough of a
chance of a downturn that one can't dismiss it.
I do think this is a
time when we need some patience; we need to be very pragmatic about
applying patience. We ought to wait a reasonable period and look for
some indicators that the economy is picking up.
If we don't see those
signs after some reasonable period, we have to keep an open mind about
how to proceed.
But at this point I'd be willing to play the odds of
a pickup.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. We think our District is growing somewhat more
slowly; it might be described as flat at best.
In the agricultural
area, because of the subsidized grain shipments, the wheat price that
we've talked about has gone up and that, of course, has been positive.
But livestock prices, which had fallen sharply, have only come back
slightly. And we're still projecting a slowdown in agricultural
income, which has [adverse] effects on suppliers to that industry.
Also, with natural gas prices being so weak, the energy industry,
which is a very important resource in our District, is suffering. As
someone said, the rig count for us is about the same as for the
nation--about 33 percent less than it was a year ago--but very weak;
and employment in that sector is very weak as well.
In manufacturing,
we are involved in the auto industry. Shifts have been eliminated and
cutbacks in production schedules have caused unemployment to increase
in that industry; layoffs of about 1,000 people in Kansas City were
just announced recently. General aviation has also seen some modest
falloff, but for us that is important. The construction industry has
been positive, particularly in the residential area.
Some significant
gains have occurred there, and that has been the most positive note
out of the District.
On the national economy, our projections are less robust than
those in the Greenbook, partly because we have seen such a poor fourth
quarter for the economy and we look at what impact that would have
going forward.
We see a slower increase in the first quarter, or
perhaps no increase at all, and a pickup after that, putting our
projections below the central tendency [unless] we assume that there
will be some modest fiscal package, which would bring us back up
toward the central tendency.
With that we see unemployment in the
same range as the staff projection and inflation without the fiscal
stimulus probably being within the same range or lower.
So, that is
how we see the national economy as well as the District economy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The Eleventh District economy can be classified
as flat to down slightly. As Tom [Hoenig] indicated, we're also
suffering from the low natural gas prices and not too high oil prices.
A lot of drilling activity is being shifted overseas. Also, in our
major metropolitan areas, defense-related industries at least
prospectively are losing employment, and that's getting a lot of
attention. We continue to hear a lot about the potential loss of a
major GM plant in our metropolitan area. The leading indicators that
our staff looks at for Texas and the District, though, have been
There has been improvement in some of
offering some promise recently.
The average workweek is up and initial
the labor market indicators.
claims for [un]employment are down locally. There is good news along

2/4-5/92

-20-

the border areas:
The smaller towns are benefiting from a stronger
Our contacts, Beigebook and
Mexican economy than the U.S. economy.
otherwise, have been mentioning being squeezed by their inability to
For the first time in a long
pass on a lot of their rising costs.
time, we've heard complaints about higher minimum wages and the higher
mandated benefits in health costs and so forth.
I've been in Dallas a
year now--this is my first anniversary--and in my [staff's] briefing
yesterday I couldn't help but notice that we were at about the same
place this year relative to the recession and hope for a recovery as
we were a year ago. The main difference was that the staff seemed
In the area of
more pessimistic this time than they did a year ago.
hope and better sentiment, the people I talked to reacted very
favorably to our easing move in December. That seemed to give some
hope. They're very skeptical about any benefits coming out of the
fiscal side.
They don't know what [the fiscal initiatives] will be,
but they know they won't do any good and may do harm. I was at Texas
A&M last week and I heard about an Aggie doctor who illustrated this
He amputated a patient's leg, came in the
fiscal package very well.
next morning and said:
"Well, I have some good news and some bad
The bad news is I took the wrong leg; the good news is the
news.
other one is getting better."
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern, can you improve on

this?
MR. STERN. I won't even try!
For a long time, I've been
reporting that the District economy is relatively steady, plodding
That continues to be a reasonable description
ahead at a slow pace.
of the situation. Obviously, some sectors are doing better than
others and some regions of the District are doing better, but none is
really doing awfully.
So, in that sense, we seem to be doing okay.
On the positive side, as several people have already commented,
recently almost wherever one goes, residential construction seems to
be improving; that is underway. And as other people have commented,
attitudes clearly have improved in the sense that while they always
seem to me to be worse than justified by circumstances some of the
intensity of the gloom seems to have lifted, if I can put it that way.
So, slightly better attitudes at least seem to be emerging.
On the negative side, some manufacturers have commented--and
I think this is implicit in the charts that Mike presented--that
inventories are excessive upstream and that has started to affect them
in the sense that orders have slowed and so forth. Although we're not
a big textile district, our textile manufacturers are running pretty
So, there is something
well full out, as Tom [Melzer also] commented.
going on at least in that area.
With regard to the national economy, I do think the stage is
set for something like the Greenbook forecast.
I don't have a very
different view as to how things will turn out.
I would reemphasize
the point that has been made that it is by most comparisons a very
conservative forecast, and it wouldn't be altogether shocking to me if
the economy did somewhat better than that. The one thing that does
trouble me a bit, looking at the national circumstances at the moment,
is the state of the long-term bond market where clearly nothing
favorable has been happening in recent weeks.
Indeed, rates are at
the levels they were before the discount rate cut back in December.

-21-

2/4-5/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I have very little substantively
to try to offer today, but I would like to put out one notion.
I am
struck by the very strong consensus that I read in the press--and
indeed it seems to be here as well--that the economy is likely to be
"flattish" in the first quarter, that it will be a little better or
that a recovery of some magnitude will occur in the second quarter,
and that the economy then will move on up from there.
I share that
view. What worries me is that I have a bit of the contrarian in me,
and I ask myself:
If we have this very strong consensus, it's
probably wrong, but in what direction and how?
Is it too strong or
too weak?
Again, I'm part of the consensus, but my suspicion is that
we could very well see events prove to be on the stronger side.
If we
were going to have a collapse, it seems to me that it would likely
have been evident in the fourth quarter and would be underway now, and
I don't sense that it is going on now. And the longer that doesn't
appear, it seems to me the less likely that it will.
It's probably
too soon to rule it out, but [more strength than is projected] would
seem to me to be the way things are liable to go. We have some things
going for us already that should help, maybe more than we know. The
short-term rates and the monetary stimulus that's in the pipeline
should help.
The refinancing of homes is putting more spendable
income into the pockets of people every day. And I wouldn't be a bit
surprised if this little uptick in long rates doesn't accelerate that
I'd also
[development]; and it might accelerate home sales as well.
bet that the white collar layoffs have seen their peak.
I think most
CEOs who felt the need to lay off workers probably wanted to be able
to report it in their year-end statements and got it done in the
fourth quarter.
If there's anything to that, layoffs are going to
decline and that should help confidence. The credit crunch may be
beginning to ease and the bank crisis may be beginning to ease.
We're
hearing here today and we read that banks are looking for good loans.
My suspicion is that if they look, they're going to find them along
the way.
Fourth-quarter earnings of banks were better; their stock
prices are up; and the loan officers' survey says that nobody is
tightening anymore.
So, maybe we will begin to get some relief there,
although I don't think it's going to be very dramatic very quickly.
On balance, I'm with the consensus but if the consensus does prove to
be wrong, I think it's going to be on the up side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I want to discuss for a minute
this confidence issue. If the consumer is truly the key to this
economy and if a lack of confidence is what is driving his behavior at
the moment, I ask myself:
What are the things that are going to
change that?
Now, my previous suggestion that we hire a behavioral
psychologist was rejected by this Committee last time, so I was
looking around for other solutions!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Couldn't afford it!

MR. LAWARE. We couldn't afford it; well, the Administrative
governor put a veto on that!
MR. KELLEY.

You already voted for the budget;

it's too late!

2/4-5/92

-22-

MR. LAWARE. We've been told since November that the
President's speech would lay down a program for the country that would
inspire confidence.
It was a letdown; it certainly didn't draw any
"hazzahs" from the assembled throng and it certainly did not create a
consensus that we are now on a high road.
The corporate
restructurings and the layoffs, which Governor Kelley referred to,
have continued, and they increasingly involve Blue Chip companies that
were considered above the storm. And I think that has further alarmed
not only blue collar workers, the traditional layoff victims, but
white collar workers as well.
Congress is certainly mushing around
without much show of confidence-building leadership.
The fiscal
solutions involving massive cuts in defense spending seem to me to
instill panic in the hearts not only of employees of defense
industries but also their shareholders.
And modest tax cuts don't
sound to the recipients as if nirvana has arrived.
Having said that,
it is hard for me to believe that further monetary ease in the absence
of some statesmanlike political leadership can really restore the
economy to vigor. At the same time, it seems to me that previous
monetary policy moves and the accumulated demand that has to be there
in the economy should make something close to the staff Greenbook
projections for GDP a realizable target without further monetary
stimulus. In the pursuit of price stability, I don't think the modest
growth rate outlined in the Greenbook is an undesirable outcome,
although I must confess that the staff outlook for inflation is
somewhat disappointing in the context of that slower growth rate.
Mr.
Chairman, that's all I have to say on the confidence issue today.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I don't have much to add.
I like the
Greenbook. I liked it last February as well.
And I hope I never see
it [repeated] again--not next February at least!
I think the economy
remains in a state of lethargy, although perhaps the intensity of the
gloom is burning off.
I think it's worthwhile to ask where we stand.
We're in pretty good shape in the sense that we do have a lot of
stimulus in the pipeline and we can see that working visibly and
forcefully in financial markets--all the things we've mentioned in
terms of the refinancings.
Of course, we've been making this argument
for some time now and someone is going to ask:
When does this
stimulus start to trickle out the other end of the pipeline?
We have
cut the fed funds rate 175 basis points in the last six months; 125
basis points of that has come in the last four months; our last move
was six weeks ago.
Sooner or later people are going to say:
"Where's
the beef here?"
What real economic data do we have, even the forwardlooking data like orders, that would suggest that we have found the
appropriate monetary stance consistent with recovery? The housing
market continues its modest rebound and we have exports as well.
Of
course, it's still pretty early in the lagged response cycle.
However, so far we have relatively little to show for our actions.
Those actions were certainly received as a credible move to realign
short-term rates with lower inflation expectations but they have yet
to produce much in the way of real economic stimulus.
It's good that
M2 is growing a bit more but it's still in the lower half of its
range. When I look at the outlook for persistent slack in the
economy, capacity utilization and labor, and the continued slow growth
in M2 and credit, with significant sectors of the economy clearly
sitting on the bench out of the recovery game--I mean by that state
and local governments, commercial real estate, and consumers in the

-23-

2/4-5/92

sense that they lack the debt capacity for explosive spending--it's
still difficult for me to conjure up much fear that an overly robust
recovery will ignite inflation.
I guess there is some fear on the fiscal side, although I
think that will tend to lead to chaos rather than effective stimulus.
Nonetheless, we have had growth in M1 and reserves that has gone from
Given
high to very high. We also have a high long-term bond rate.
the way the long bond has been reacting to statements on the screen,
the evidence tends to suggest that the long bond rate would fall if we
Despite that,
eased again. That's no reason to ease, necessarily.
the fact that the long bond rate hasn't come down more is clearly a
I think underlying that concern is primarily the fiscal
concern.
situation. Despite a rigorously binding budget agreement, the deficit
has continued to balloon even before one considers the fiscal package.
And now we're moving to a fiscal bidding war where the first bid is a
If I were a long bond investor, certainly I
deficit of $400 billion.
There is the
could understand why I would be a little concerned.
supply side of that and also the artificial supply in the sense that
dealers have been heavily shorting government securities as part of
the process of issuing this record volume of corporate debt. And I
So, I
suppose there may be the expectations of recovery as well.
It is consistent with
think the long bond rate has to give one pause.
the expectation of a cessation of progress on inflation once the
It's interesting to note that many private
recovery starts.
forecasters as well as OMB and the Administration project a flattening
out of the inflation rate once the recovery gets underway--a
flattening out in the 3 plus percent range rather than the continued
And this is despite very extended
progress that the Greenbook shows.
periods of slow growth in M2 and the persistence of slack in the
I, for one,
So, I think there's ample reason for caution.
economy.
don't want to see us go so far that a major tightening is inevitable
once the recovery gets underway. And I'm certainly sobered by the
realization that some on the Committee would suggest that we may have
gone that far already.
So, I would agree with Ed Boehne that it's a time for
We're at a critical period here in the sense that we have a
patience.
few weeks of relative quiet before the fiscal or political battle
I fear that will be even more unsettling for the markets
intensifies.
While it is a time for patience, I
and may tend to immobilize us.
think it's also a time for vigilance. We should start to see some of
this stimulus dribble out of the pipeline soon and we ought to start
being concerned if we don't get some movement soon or if we should
start to get some convincing negative news or significant signs of
deterioration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

Speaking near the end, there's not much left
MR. CORRIGAN.
to say in terms of the national economy. It's very hard to take
serious exception to Mike's forecast at least for 1992; 1993 is
obviously another question. I would agree, as many of you have said
in one fashion or another, that attitudes at least have stopped
getting worse. Whether they are better, it's hard to say; but one can
Even some of the most bearish major
[at least] say they are no worse.
I also think one
corporate CEOs now associate themselves with that.
can make a pretty darn good argument that the stabilization of

2/4-5/92

-24-

attitudes, even if that's all it is, is fairly directly related to the
change in monetary policy that was made at the end of December.
Now, in terms of the shaping of the future, I have managed to
convince myself that we probably are a bit further along in this
correction of the debt overhang [problem] that Tom Simpson was talking
about than maybe is fully recognized. I also think we can now begin
to make a case that the banking sector--and perhaps the financial
sector more generally--looks a little better even if there still is a
long way to go.
And I do agree with several people who made the
comment that banks are more [receptive to borrowers].
Just in terms
of advertising space in the New York Times, we see a lot of full page
ads now about loans, not deposits.
If those two points are accurate
even at the margin, I'd stipulate that one of the key assumptions of
the chart show, to the effect that the credit crunch will ease
"somewhat"--I think that was the word--in 1993, might be a bit
pessimistic.
I might be able to envision that [easing] at least in
"somewhat" terms some time in 1992.
But having said that, I agree
also with John LaWare that the confidence factor is the wild card.
Even if there are some straws in the wind that smell a little better
and look a little better, the economy does remain vulnerable to shock.
That's one of the reasons why I blow a little hot and cold about the
level of the stock market.
But I also think, as a number of people
have said, that the source of particular uncertainty is political with
a capital "P," bipartisan.
I can't top Bob McTeer but I agree that
the great [risk] on the fiscal side is that [the stimulus] will get
overdone or that the process will get ugly, or both. If it gets ugly
in a process sense, that certainly is not going to help confidence.
If it gets ugly in a substantive sense, financial markets aren't going
to like it.
And that is a major risk.
Perhaps a bit longer term, I must also say that I take this
Japan/U.S. thing as a symptom of what I perceive as a real rise in
protectionism and some elements of neo-isolationism. This is a real
concern even though it may not seem as imminent as the fiscal
[actions].
And while it's even less imminent, the point that Bill
McDonough made in his remarks at the opening of the meeting about this
tension among the Europeans--with a quite different economic profile
in Germany on the one hand than in most of the other countries, with
its implications for exchange rates and interest rates and some other
symptoms of a political stress point--can have important economic
implications, though maybe not immediately.
So, there's no shortage
of things to worry about out there.
But the risks as I see them are
much better balanced today than I viewed them over much of the fourth
quarter.
I think we always run the risk of instant replay but for
that reason I feel more comfortable with the kind of profile in Mike's
forecast right now than I have for the last few months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that the bond market continues to
be a check in regard to our ability even to re-inflate.
I have some
question as to whether we can cause the growth path to be much more
robust than is forecast.
Probably we would have to demonstrate that
we're re-inflating before we can alter some of these conditions that
exist in people's confidence level.
I don't think I've ever seen so
much ill regard for our government among people. And even though we
think that inflation is a monetary phenomenon, people out there have a

-25-

2/4-5/92

lack of confidence in government and what spills over from that
somehow or other is that things won't be dealt with in a proper
manner.
Maybe that is what causes long bond prices to be at the same
place they were 2-1/4 years ago.
That's a rather sad commentary.
Now, clearly, the housing market has been helped because the sevenyear Treasury rate has come down quite substantially over the last
2-1/4 years even though the long rate has not.
I sense, as many of
you do, that there is some perking up, particularly in the housing
market.
Houses are selling; old houses are selling. And that does
involve new activities.
Certainly, a lot of refinancing is going on.
As to whether the refinancing is being done in such a manner as to
reduce the payments, the best sources that I have indicate that 70
percent of the refinancings are going to reducing the length of the
maturity and keeping the payment [amounts] about the same.
Clearly, M2 looks a little better than it did a month ago.
I
agree that in the commercial banking system the capital positions of
many of the banks are improving; and the stock market seems to be a
plus.
But I can't find any robust sector. I can't find any area, in
any industry or any geographic region, that really is alive.
I know,
Tom, that you have those textile mills running at capacity; but as far
as robust and entrepreneurial spirits being charged up, that doesn't
seem to me to be really there.
I think some additional mischief could
occur on the international scene. Europe could be a little softer
than the staff has [projected] in the Greenbook.
I see very little
prospects for the GATT round getting anywhere by April, as everyone is
saying.
And if that doesn't occur, I tend to share the feelings that
have been expressed about how protectionism might slow us down.
So,
we have what I think is a recovery out there, but I certainly don't
think it is a very robust one.
If it is, I'll be mistaken.
I'm
somewhat more optimistic on the GDP deflator for this year, but only
marginally so.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY.
I think that we're back to the problem of the
law of averages. Listening to the comments around the table, on
average, the Greenbook is correct.
But with all respect to our staff,
when I did a count I counted five who are more optimistic, five who
are more pessimistic, and two who think you're about right.
It means
that on average you're right.
I think about Mike Kelley's comment to
the effect that the consensus is wrong; our dilemma is that we don't
know in which direction it is wrong. One of the reasons that's true
is that we have begun in the legislative and executive arenas to adopt
pro-cyclical policies instead of the usual anti-cyclical policies.
Now, if you'll excuse a witticism:
In the current environment, procyclical policies mean that when things are bad, act aggressively to
make them worse.
If you look at the particular legislation that has
passed, I think the pro-cyclical nature is clear.
Beginning with the
banking legislation:
Through regulatory fiat and through legislative
policy we've adopted banking provisions that, when things start to
deteriorate because they feed through into the capital environment,
rapidly shrink loans.
When things begin to turn around and we have
rapidly rising capital, either through market values or through the
ability of the banks to raise equity we will hopefully, sometime, have
a rapidly rising ability for banks to make loans, but right now we're
on the down side.

-26-

2/4-5/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sounds like the Banking Act of 1863.

MR. LINDSEY.
It very well could be; my memory doesn't go
back that far, Mr. Chairman, and unfortunately nor does my history.
MR. BOEHNE.

You were on the wrong side of the war!

MR. LINDSEY. Yes, that's right; we were fighting you guys
back then!
[Laughter]
In labor markets we also have adopted procyclical policies. They were well intentioned, but they have the
problem of being pro-cyclical.
In particular, I point to plant
closing legislation which requires substantial advance notice. I can
understand the humanitarian reasons for doing so, but when the economy
starts to turn down, or when we're in a down cycle, a company is
forced to announce more plant closings, which has an adverse feed into
psychology [and] the confidence factor. And if you look at what is
happening on Capitol Hill, the other two potentially bad things that
will happen if things continue to get worse--and they've already been
mentioned--are a gross fiscal stimulus, which will push up long-term
bond rates, and a revival of protectionism.
We have to think about how to interrupt this pro-cyclical
policy. The keys have already been mentioned.
The first is that the
public knows that the political apparatus is not working well. One
can see that in that the purpose of the politicians is to engender
confidence.
The President certainly billed his speech as one to
engender confidence and the opposition appropriately called it "warmed
over" and said that there was no confidence there.
Further, if you
think about why our December policy was apparently as successful as it
was in building confidence--just about everyone commented on that--I
think it was because it was decisive.
With all that as background, I think that on average the
staff forecast is right.
I don't know which way it is wrong, but I do
know that it is wrong. I do know that the risks are high on both the
up side and on the down side. And the proper policy call is that we
should be as flexible as possible and should be prepared to take on
the risks whether it turns out that we're wrong up or wrong down.
In
addition to being flexible, we should also learn the lesson of
December and we should act decisively when we act.
But in which
direction that action should be, I share the Vice Chairman's view:
I
don't know. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you.
Coming toward the end of this
discussion, there's really not as much to say.
Based on the Greenbook
analysis and the comments that have been put forward describing what
is going on in each of your Districts, it still seems to me that at
best we can say the recovery is sluggish.
We've been saying that for
quite a while and I agree with Governor Angell in that I can't see
where that source of light is that will lead us out of this.
Some of
the disappointing news that we're continuing to hear really confirms
the hypothesis that we're seeing some structural changes.
This is not
just a cyclical move. The problem with that is that it may take us
longer to come out of the recession than might have been the case in
the past.
I will say, on the positive side, that the positive signs
we are seeing are very good for the long run.
The balance sheet

2/4-5/92

-27-

restructuring certainly is good for the long term, as is the
strengthening of the banking sector; and the fact that inflation does
not seem to be as much of a concern in a broad variety of sectors is
good for the long term. We're seeing some change in people's
viewpoint toward savings.
We've been saying for a long time that we
need to have savings policies in this country, and I think we're
starting to see some improvement there.
And the easing that occurred
in late December was about as positively received as we might have
hoped.
So, that was very helpful.
I do think that a lot of the
easing that has occurred over the last year and a half probably has
been soaked up in the balance sheet restructuring. So, a lot of the
easing that we may have thought was in the pipeline may be used up.
I
do agree that we're not yet seeing in the real economy the easing that
occurred in late December.
We certainly saw [mostly positive
reactions], with the exception of the long bond situation.
Certainly
I'm concerned, as is Larry,
the stock market reacted very favorably.
about what might be happening on Capitol Hill to fix the situation.
In view of the fact that I don't think the easing is fully reflected
in the real economy, I don't feel quite the same pressure to ease that
But like the Vice Chairman, I think we
I was feeling in December.
In
have to be quite vigilant over the next perhaps couple of weeks.
the next couple of weeks there may be a window before Congress starts
If there is a desire generally to ease,
doing all kinds of things.
from a political perspective--though I hate to say it--it may be
On the one hand, it's not expected
better to do it sooner than later.
before Congress gets going, and it may well strengthen the hand of
those who wish to try to address the deficit situation. So, if we're
thinking in terms of ease, I'd be inclined to urge that it be sooner
rather than later. Nevertheless, having said that, I'm not feeling
quite the same strong pressure that I was in late December.
With that note I think it
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you.
would probably be appropriate to adjourn until 9:00 a.m. tomorrow
morning.
[Meeting recessed]

-28-

2/4-5/92

February 5, 1992--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next item on the agenda is the longrun ranges for the aggregates, and I will call on Don Kohn to brief
Wayne Angell
us.
I'm sorry, Don, could you hold up for a second?
would like to amend some of the remarks that he made yesterday, so
perhaps the best time to do that would be right now. Governor, the
floor is yours.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I don't know whether "amend" is
exactly the right word because as I was talking yesterday and
listening to myself it sounded very confusing to me.
[Laughter]
MR. BLACK.

You can imagine how the rest of us felt!

MR. ANGELL. I decided last night that the reason it was
confusing was because I wasn't really willing to put the proper labels
on what I think are our current circumstances.
I don't think we can
do the right job of selecting policy unless we understand more
precisely the nature of the circumstances that we're in.
Those
circumstances are, I believe, that we are [involved] in a long-cycle
event. And it's a long-cycle event about which we must understand the
cause because we can't do the cure if we don't understand the cause.
I think the cause of this long-cycle event was the very expansionist
monetary polices of the 1970s that created double-digit inflation.
That double-digit inflation began a debt cycle in the private sector,
which in a sense was not sustainable unless the rate of inflation was
to be increased continually.
I believe it was not possible for the
world's reserve currency to be subject to a continuation of that
inflation.
So, it was entirely proper that under the Volcker Federal
Reserve that was headed off and brought back down.
But, ultimately, no more inflation means that the private
sector--either corporations or households--does not wish to hold the
debt as a ratio to their income that they did before.
Now, during a
long-cycle event it seems to me that the proper policy is one of
price-level stability in order to get real stability to the event. As
we've found during this period, to keep disinflation from turning into
deflation we've had to provide reserves at a rate much [higher] than
we ordinarily would think necessary, and we still have had a hard time
keeping M2 and M3 growth where we wanted it.
If it's the case that
households and corporations are trying to reduce debt as a percentage
of their cash flow and their income, then it seems to me that we have
to admit something that central bankers never want to admit, and that
is that the government has to become the debtor of last resort in such
a circumstance.
Because if we're going to force the growth of credit
at a 3 percent rate or whatever even anemic rate may seem desirable,
then someone has to be the owner on the other side because credit
can't grow faster than debt grows.
I think it's entirely responsible
and important for the continuation of the creation of the private
sector that those debt ratios be brought down. And under those
circumstances I do not know how government debt can keep from going
up.
That raises the question for me as to what we say about this
borrowing because it's the borrowing that causes the people out there
to be so unhappy. The people are unhappy with their government
because they don't understand how during this critical time we can
have what they call "irresponsible borrowing."

-29-

2/4-5/92

Now, if that's the case, then I am somewhat admitting that
Keynesian economics is really depression economics and I don't want to
sound Keynesian; it's terrible for me to sound Keynesian, but I think
we ought to be wise in regard to what the government does as it
increases its debt. As defense spending comes down and as we have
layoffs of highly skilled workers in the defense sector, it seems to
me that it will be important for us to have [other] capital
investment. It's not good to replace defense spending without
employment compensation. That's a very bad tradeoff in regard to our
So, I would much prefer to
getting done what we need to get done.
recognize the desirability of public sector spending on the
infrastructure, that is, building highways and bridges and doing
public sector spending that has the best multiplier in regard to the
private sector. In other words, what I was trying to say yesterday
and sounded so confused about is that I don't think monetary policy
I don't think monetary
can in and of itself resolve this problem.
policy can do it [now] any more than it did in the Great Depression.
So, Mr. Chairman, I wanted to revise and extend my remarks to
recognize that this event is different. By that I do not mean that it
has to be more severe; I do not mean that the outlook is necessarily
But I do believe there's a downside risk
worse than Mr. Prell has it.
to the outcome that Mr. Prell has outlined. That is, if the debt
contraction in households and in the business sector is to go on and
if households ex ante wish to increase their savings all at the same
time, then the paradox of thrift leads us to somewhat slower consumer
sector spending than we have projected in front of us. And under
those circumstances our job ought to be viewed somewhat differently
and that is not that we can fix it but that we can keep it from
Thank
getting worse. That would lead me to a stability orientation.
you for indulging me in that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
to Don Kohn.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, governor.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

Let's now move on

[Statement--see

I'm going to be distributing a
MR. LINDSEY. Thank you.
picture of what President Black and I will be proposing. Mr.
Chairman, while that picture is going around the table, I'd like to
begin with an apology. It had been my intent this morning to wear the
Thomas Jefferson tie that Alan Murray made famous following the last
FOMC meeting. But I got dressed in the dark because I didn't want to
wake my wife, and it turned out that I pulled out my Adam Smith tie
I was embarrassed, but Bob Black
instead of my Thomas Jefferson tie.
has reassured me that had Smith lived on this side of the Atlantic he
no doubt would have chosen Virginia. And he also no doubt would have
With that aside-preferred the "Tunnel Option."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
indicate that!
MR. LINDSEY.
MR. BLACK.
issues.

The last time I spoke to him he didn't

It's the "Invisible Tunnel."

He may have thought you weren't up-to-date on the

-30-

2/4-5/92

MR. LINDSEY.
Plan"--see Appendix.]
MR. BLACK.

[Statement and charts entitled

"The Virginia

Shall I go ahead, Mr. Chairman?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go right ahead.

MR. BLACK. I can't do what he said I would do, but actually
he's given me a lot more credit for this than he should have.
I had
put this on the back burner; I had thought about it many times
earlier. He surfaced the plan and sent it to me and asked for my
suggestions and I made one or two suggestions, which he very
graciously adopted.
Then he sent me another version and I made one
minor suggestion on that.
So, the thought of giving me the credit for
it is really misplaced.
Since he has entitled it "The Virginia Plan,"
I wish very much that I could have Patrick Henry do the defense!
There's little doubt that he and Thomas Jefferson and George
Washington and George Mason would certainly have a favorite rate of
growth of the money supply with the use of "tunnels," if anybody had
ever brought that up.
I do know that they would be a bit worried if
they knew the "Virginia Plan" was being defended by somebody who was
born in Kentucky. My only defense there would be that Kentucky was
once a part of Virginia.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

It was then.

That's right.

MR. BLACK. Yes, it was then, that's right.
I wish we could
go back in time and I could speak at that time; but while I'm a
Kentuckian by birth I'm a Virginian by choice--maybe that will give me
a certain amount of credibility--and I also have two children who are
native Virginians and I married a native Virginian. You kind of
absorb some of this as you go along.
I think Governor Lindsey has already stated quite well the
reasons for adopting the multi-year tunnel approach instead of the
annual cones and basing this on the level of M2 at the end of 1990
originally. Now, we set the data on 1991, but it comes out to the
same thing. Let me make three additional comments on this, mostly by
way of elaboration.
First, the upside insurance this would give us at
this particular moment is really a compelling reason. The [beauty] of
this tunnel is that it pretty much guarantees that we would get price
stability over the long run--which I think should be the objective of
monetary policy to the exclusion of all others--as long as we were
willing to reduce the rate of growth in the money supply until we got
it down to the rate at which the potential output of the economy could
increase [over time].
Now, everything we know about monetary history
tells us that we can stabilize price levels if we get [money supply
growth] down over time to somewhere in the neighborhood of 3 percent
or so.
People differ on what the potential growth of the economy is,
but I don't think there's any doubt that it would be greater if we had
price stability than if we didn't. And this is essentially the
message of the P* model, which is one of the finest pieces of work I
think we've done in the System.
I wish I'd had a hand in that, but I
certainly applaud the others of you who did.

2/4-5/92

-31-

I think a continuous unbroken tunnel would be a much more
appropriate and powerful device for controlling the long-run rate of
growth in M2 than the current cones because it would eliminate base
drift. And base drift has really been the bane of our existence.
Whatever base drift has brought us in the way of short-term
flexibility in some years, in practice I think it has made it
virtually impossible for us to control the long-run rate of trend
growth of M2, with the result that we have [not] known and nobody else
has known what the price level would be several years down the road.
Consequently, I've concluded that no matter how strong our intentions
are to reduce inflation--and for the last several years this group has
had a stronger inclination in that direction than virtually at any
time in the history of the System and I don't think that intention has
ever been stronger than it is right now--I don't think we will achieve
Despite our feelings on that and our best efforts, I don't
that goal.
think we will ever achieve that goal unless we do something about
moving away from our present targeting procedures. And I think the
tunnel would address this. Moreover, and I can't emphasize this point
I think this move to a tunnel would greatly increase the
too much:
credibility of the System. We have said repeatedly that our intention
over time is to bring down the rate of growth in the money supply to
This would spell that out in a great deal
noninflationary levels.
more detail and yet it would be clear that we would have the necessary
leeway in the short run to do what needs to be done. And if this did
increase our credibility, it would greatly reduce the transitional
cost of moving to price stability.
Second--and all of this is relevant to the comments that Don
put in the Bluebook under the "tunnel option"--it's certainly true as
the Bluebook suggests that we wouldn't want to adopt the tunnel option
when the relationships between M2 and income and prices are going to
fluctuate in the future. All we really have to guide us is past
experience and, historically, we know that there have been variations
in the short run extending sometimes more than a year but that in the
long run there has been stability in that relationship. V2, by the
best statistical measures that we have, has been constant and
predictable over the long run. Consequently, this tunnel approach
But the tunnel needs to be wide
makes a great deal of sense to me.
enough to accommodate a fair amount of these variations in V2 that we
normally have over periods as long as one to several years. Maybe a
4-point spread, as Governor Lindsey suggested, would be the proper
amount, but it's possible that the width should be greater than that.
It's important to note in this regard that even a very wide tunnel
would still constrain the trend growth of M2 over a long period of
time sufficiently to ensure price stability.
And finally, the Bluebook may be right in suggesting that a
substantial further easing of policy might be needed to get M2 up to
But if we had a tunnel
the midpoint of Governor Lindsey's tunnel.
that extended our long-run trend objectives to 1993, I wouldn't feel
compelled to move M2 up too rapidly from its present position near the
bottom of the tunnel to the midpoint by the end of this year if it
In other words, this is not
were clear that the recovery had resumed.
a ploy for ease. What I'm trying to do here is to suggest a long-run
strategy that would give us the necessary flexibility in the short
run.
So, with regard to the width of the tunnel, it might be that it
would be better for us to have a 5-percentage point tunnel if we
wanted to make sure right now that we accommodate what is probably a

2/4-5/92

good projection on the part of the staff, which is that 3-1/2 percent
M2 growth in 1992 would be consistent with a resumption of the
recovery. But, again, even a fairly wide tunnel like that would be
concerned with the course and control of M2 over a long period of
time. And that to me is the beauty of the tunnel approach.
So, Mr. Chairman, like Governor Lindsey, I hope the Committee
will give the "Virginia Plan" favorable consideration.
I did not
admit this to you, Larry, but as you were labeling this "The Virginia
Plan" I thought to myself it really sounds more Hamiltonian than
Jeffersonian. And then I thought with your background from New York
you could send a "New York Plan."
But in my case, although I spent
right much time in New York, the first time I went to New York I
crossed on the Staten Island Ferry prior to shipping overseas at the
end of World War II and I didn't even see the Statue of Liberty. I
was the only one who went out without seeing it and that was the main
thing I was interested in seeing. So, I didn't think I could defend a
New York Plan, but I do think this may be a little more Hamiltonian
than Jeffersonian. And I hope the Committee will honor these
distinguished forebears of ours who, other than an occasional glass of
whiskey, probably would have liked nothing better than a slow, steady
rate of growth in the money supply!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well done, gentlemen. Let me raise a
few issues on the other side of this.
I don't think there's any
question that we all hold the basic view that we wish to move toward
price stability as a necessary condition for maximum long-term real
growth. Also, I think that the monetary policies we set around this
table, and the mechanisms we employ to achieve them, don't rest all
that much on simplistic cones, tunnels, or whatever.
Hopefully, we're
looking at the issues in somewhat greater detail to understand the
relationship between money and GDP. Having said that, I have been in
and out of a position in favor of the "Tunnel Approach" over the
years, and this is the original version of money supply growth
notions.
I think the key question we have to ask ourselves is:
To
what extent do we actually use the cones to operate policy?
We're obviously acutely aware of what other people see with
respect to these data.
And to the extent that the particular cones
that we use--or even if we were to use tunnels--reflect our basic view
of what we wish to be done, then indeed we would follow them. But the
cone is a simplified version of P*.
Everything that's in the cone is
obviously in P* in a somewhat more detailed way. And we do use P* as
a guide and indeed have been using it, obviously, for the last several
years as we try to move our way toward price stability.
Indeed, it's
that sort of process that suggests to us what the path of money supply
should be.
So, I think we have to ask ourselves several questions
about this.
Would our switching from cones to tunnels affect what we
actually do here?
Or are we trying to alter the perception of the
market and other people?
I submit it is the latter, not the former,
that is crucial to this.
And if that is in fact the case, then I
think we are confronted with a very difficult problem here, which is
that even though we may perceive the tunnel as being an endeavor to
simplify P* as the long-term goal, as a practical matter we are
signaling a very sharp and immediate reduction in the funds rate to
move M2 growth up [in the cone].
Were we to start something like this
when we are at the midpoint of a range, it would be very easy to do.
I don't think one can readily argue strenuously--with the exception of

2/4-5/92

-33-

a few minor issues I would raise--between the desirability of a cone
and a tunnel.
I think every person around this table has been on both
sides of this in their monetary policy discussions.
I'm most
concerned that if we were to do this at this stage, it would look as
though we were merely trying to hide the fact that we really want to
move the money supply up sharply by dropping the funds rate.
And in
the context of what is happening on the fiscal side, I must tell you
that I would be quite nervous about that perception being conveyed
even if somebody as formidable as Bob Black, who certainly has no
reputation as an inflationist in this country, were to come forward
and defend this particular plan.
My basic impression at this stage is that were we to move
from what we define as the bottom of the range and put the tunnel into
position, we essentially would be saying that we are going to make a
major push on the money supply and presumably on interest rates. Now,
that clearly is not the basic view of either Governor Lindsey or
President Black. My concern is that there's a degree of skepticism
out there, which I find frankly to be very deep-seated. And while I
personally would not mind discussing this in some detail--I might even
vote for it if we were starting from the midpoint of the tunnel
because most of the arguments you make are valid arguments and I think
they make a great deal of sense--my concern is where we are at this
particular point.
The difficulty that we have mechanically is that we
have chosen, for better or worse, to rebase on the grounds that there
are structural problems in the relationship between M2 and gross
domestic product that [cause that relationship to] veer off from time
to time for several years. And that shows up in the P* data; it would
show up in the tunnel data. What our cones enable us to do is to
reset all the past imbalances to square one. As I said to some of my
colleagues, it's like pushing the odometer on the dashboard back to
zero so you start from scratch.
Now, in today's environment, we know
there's base drift; we know that money growth is under where we
And even though we start from square
probably would want it to be.
one, what we do as a consequence is to adjust to that fact [on the
basis of] our judgments as to where we want it to be.
I was also
concerned that if we were to move the range up to, say, 3-1/2 to 7-1/2
percent or something like that instead of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent to
reflect the base drift or even more, that would create the same
problem that starting at the bottom of the cone suggests.
The general [suggestion] that the other "Kohn" raised with
respect to this issue is, namely, to stay where we are but to
recognize fully that we have had base drift. And if indeed the
depressing forces on M2 which we presume to be temporary start to ease
and M2 starts to move into the upper [portion] of the cone, I don't
think we should feel pressed to tighten policy to bring it back in;
[rather we would] make an ad hoc adjustment in our procedures to
recognize that this is not a bad level of M2 at which to be.
So, I
would conclude that I don't see any difference in philosophy between
my view of money and that which Governor Lindsey and President Black
expounded.
In fact, were we in a particular range at this stage and
changed to a [tunnel], it would not create the question of "What kind
of game are they trying to pull?"
I'm concerned about doing that at
this time.
I think the benefits that we would get from the tunnel, as
Governor Lindsey outlined it, we could achieve just as readily if we
are willing to operate in the upper [portion] of the cone, without
creating for ourselves what I would consider to be a rather difficult

-34-

2/4-5/92

public relations problem. As much as we may think that we are doing
things like this as a strictly analytical monetary policy position,
I'm fearful that the rest of the world with its [high] degree of
cynicism would not give us the benefit of the doubt.
Would anyone
else like to speak?
MR. BLACK.

Mr. Chairman, could I say something in response

to that?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go ahead.

MR. BLACK. I don't hear anything you say that makes anything
but sense, but my policy position now and I guess for the short run is
that I'm going to argue that we not change the federal funds rate.
I
don't see any reason for doing that at this point.
If we're concerned
that [adopting the tunnel approach] would look like a tightening, then
I think we could widen this tunnel, make it 5 percentage points, which
would ensure that we would come within our targets. And on your last
point, in a sense I think you're saying that it wouldn't be so bad to
disregard the cone if the money supply were to go over it; and I
certainly would want to do that myself if [that began to happen].
But
I think that would be a bit more damaging to our credibility than if
we had a tunnel [because with a tunnel] we would not be seen as
disregarding our targets.
People think that we don't pay a lot of
attention to the targets.
That's the only reason, really, why I want
[a procedure] that we could live with and have the flexibility we need
and not [unintelligible].
And I think with those two changes we could
do it okay.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell and then Governor

Lindsey.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I really appreciated this
discussion.
It is exactly the right presentation. I side with you
that the most critical question for us at this point in time is
conveying what we are going to do in the short run.
So, I agree with
your position.
I would, however, like to keep on tap this notion of
the tunnel as possible for the long run as well as the short run.
That is, we sometimes have [viewed] a yearly [target] as if it were
the long run and then our FOMC meeting [decision] as the short run.
It does seem to me that once we find ourselves at the middle of the
desired tunnel, it might be good in terms of a track record for us to
have [the tunnels] out there as we [draw] our cones to see whether or
not we have cumulative base drift.
Bob, I was a little surprised that you were willing to accept
a 4 percent growth path in your tunnel. I would have thought that you
would have insisted on a growth path in the tunnel of either 2 percent
or 3 percent, which is consistent with price level stability. Now, I
find this tunnel arrangement puts us in an expansionist mode; I think
it does exactly what you suggested, Mr. Chairman. If we had said we
should have fostered growth of the money stock at 4 percent last year,
not 4-1/2 percent, and if the tunnel from that should have been 3 not
4 percent, then we would have a long-run tracking guide that I think
gives P* its force but yet maintains a business as usual [approach] in
regard to this year's cone.

-35-

2/4-5/92

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I just say one thing in
response to that, because I think Governor Angell has hit upon a very
important point? When this was first done, Larry had it at 4-1/2
That was done
percent and I suggested that we cut it to 4 percent.
I would not want
and he carried the 4 percent rate on out into 1993.
4 percent in 1993; I would want to bend it down to 3-1/2 percent or
There's a sentence in the letter that he sent
something of that sort.
me in which it appeared, if someone read it carelessly, that he might
be committing himself to 4 percent forever; I don't think that was his
intention.
So, I suggested that we make it appear that we want to
So,
bend it down. What surprised you is not the way I had suggested.
I'm really where you thought I would be; it's just that we didn't end
up changing that particular thing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Could I just ask you a quick question?
If we were to adopt this and the money supply were way out of these
ranges by the end of this year for reasons that are fully technical,
would you feel that we would be required to push back into that tunnel
over a particular period of time or [would we] stay outside for a
year, or what?
MR. BLACK. I would say if [the reason for such growth] is
I have not
purely technical, it would be permissible to go outside.
been as disturbed about the low rate of growth in money we've had
recently as I would have been had I not felt that there were
If we have good reasons for why it's growing
explanations for it.
unusually fast, I think we should state those to the public and use
them as justification for staying outside [the tunnel] but say, that
if we get into a more normal pattern of money growth, we will
definitely get [money growth] back into the [tunnel].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I understand very much your
Let me say that, looking at the picture, I forgot the old
sentiments.
adage that a picture is worth a thousand words. Regrettably, the
picture that I have in front of you, which from my point of view is
It was based upon preadjusted
for presentation purposes, is in error.
M2.
Am I correct in saying that we had 3.1 percent growth last year?
MR. KOHN.

That's correct.

MR. LINDSEY. Actually, therefore, this box should be
substantially closer to the middle of the target range, i.e., 0.6
Further, if we adopt President Black's
percentage point closer.
suggestion, with which I agree completely, the tunnel would be widened
to 2-1/2 percentage points on either side and we would be a full 1.1
percentage point above the bottom end of the target range.
That
wouldn't be close by any measure. So, the picture as presented--which
by the way is not even to scale but is illustrative--actually should
show our starting point as somewhere very close to the middle of the
bottom half of the target range. That's the only correction I have in
that presentation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I have a question of clarification. It seems to
me that the initial starting point is an important issue and that it

2/4-5/92

-36-

ought to be based upon some concept of a steady state velocity. Did
you choose the fourth quarter of '90 with the thought in mind that we
were in effect in a period when we were at a steady state velocity?
Is that why you chose it?
MR. LINDSEY. Probably, and I would be happy to be corrected
by President Black on this.
We were in the middle of this period of
uncertainty.
If I were to select a period of more stable velocity, I
probably would have to go back further; and if I were to go back
further, I'd be incorporating more base drift in there.
I would be
incorporating so much base drift that the picture wouldn't look very
sensible.
So, I will admit to arbitrariness in the selection.
I was
basing it, really, on the statement of this Committee last quarter
which said it was our [objective] to move back toward the middle of
our 1991 target range. So, five months ago we were willing to say
that we should be where that middle line is.
MR. PARRY. I'm not sure how to accomplish this, but it would
seem to me that if one does see value in P*, which of course uses
steady state velocity as an important component, one would want to
figure some way to get a greater symmetry between the two procedures.
MR. CORRIGAN.

Dick Syron.

MR. SYRON. I think it's very difficult because it's very
hard to deny the intellectual consistency of this approach; in fact,
it is completely intellectually consistent with what we say we're
doing, which inevitably in discussing it leads one back to pragmatism.
My concern is that it may be a little more consistent than the
consistency of velocity allows us to be over time.
I admit in making
that argument a continuing analogy:
Hancock and Revere were
considered sort of rogues and not the intellectuals that Jefferson and
Hamilton were, so I'm not going to make their argument. My concern is
that I just don't have confidence in the stability of these
relationships in a multi-year process.
That would lead us to having
to have the tunnel be quite wide if we wanted to have any confidence
And if the tunnel has
that we were going to stick with it over time.
to be that wide and also if we need to have the possibility of bending
the tunnel, one comes back to the issue that the Chairman raised of
either a very wide tunnel or a bent tunnel.
Bent tunnels are almost
cones in a sense, and that leads us back to this problem of saying
that people could misinterpret what we're trying to do.
Obviously
some will make a fairly mechanical calculation and see that we really
would have to drop interest rates--as is implied on page 15 in the
Bluebook by extension--very, very dramatically if we wanted to come
back to the midpoint without bending the tunnels.
So, my own view is
that this [approach] ultimately is tied to the issue of how flexible
we want to be in the intermediate period.
That's what we're talking
about; all these are subsets of that.
Given the concerns that we have
about velocity's erratic behavior and given the many structural
changes that people have been talking about, I don't know that this is
the time to make a change.
I prefer for the longer term to focus on
P*, which I think is another way of doing it and avoids some of these
problems.
But having said all that, I can't deny that intellectually
this is completely consistent and in that sense would seem to be the
way to proceed.
I just am afraid that practicalities both in
perception and measurement preclude it, in my own view, at this time.

-37-

2/4-5/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

MR. CORRIGAN. In the past 13 years or so I've been around
I can't deny the neatness [of this
this track more than once, too.
Are we dealing
tunnel idea], but I have to ask myself the question:
And if we're dealing with substance, it
here with form or substance?
has to follow that the adoption of the tunnels would, in fact, mean
If we're dealing with
that policy in some sense would be different.
form, we're saying that policy would be the same but somehow or other
the form would make a difference in terms of perceptions about policy
I have to say that, despite the
--the so-called credibility effect.
neatness, I think it's much more form than it is substance. For
example--and I can't allow for compounding, so Don Kohn can correct me
if I'm wrong--I think it's about correct to say that had the Committee
at the end of 1986 adopted a policy of a five-year cone from then to
the end of 1991, policy wouldn't have been any different than it has
been in one sense.
I think we would have been within the cone each
and every year. If we put ourselves back to that position--if we had
had the cone and we were in it every year and M2 growth for the fiveyear period averaged 4 percent--would we have felt back then that we
would have achieved price stability or have been much closer to it
than we are right now?
I think a lot of people would have said "yes"
to both of those questions; but I don't think the outcome would have
been any different either in terms of the execution of policy.
I am
very skeptical--I always have been--of this so-called credibility
argument. The people out there setting wages and prices in the
trenches wouldn't know a cone or a tunnel if they were in it.
What
they react to is demand and supply in the marketplace. And what we
are ultimately trying to influence are those considerations.
So,
while I do think [the tunnel concept] is neat, I don't think there is
a great deal of substance, defined the way I did define it--meaning
that the actual execution of policy would have been different than
otherwise.
I have a lot of sympathy with the argument that Dick Syron
just made that at this juncture, not only for the reasons the Chairman
cited but for the other one that Dick hinted at, this could end up as
somewhat of a bear trap. Right now, I'm not even sure I know what the
algebraic sign of the interest elasticity of demand for M2 is.
In
other words, I could make a pretty decent argument that if we want to
accelerate M2 growth, we better raise interest rates. Now, you may
laugh, but I don't think you can just reject that out of hand.
And if
we're not even sure what the algebraic sign is, why do we want to get
In addition,
ourselves trapped into a more mechanistic approach?
there's the concern that the Chairman raised about what it might imply
regardless of how we fine-tune the beginning point. So, like others,
I
I have been around this debate more times than I'd like to count.
can't deny the neatness, but I would be reluctant to bet the ranch on
the tunnel option at this juncture.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Anybody else?

I agree with the Chairman that the best time to
MR. MULLINS.
switch is some year in which we end up at the midpoint and then we
could click right into a tunnel approach. One difficultly is that we
haven't hit the midpoint or been close to the midpoint in five years;
we've been consistently under the midpoint and we're projected to be
under again this year.
Philosophically, I like this approach, and I

2/4-5/92

-38-

agree that a lot of it turns on this issue of credibility.
I agree
with Jerry that for UAW and Caterpillar the cone versus the tunnel
will not be a major issue in their negotiations. I do think the
credibility issue is more important in the capital markets, where I
believe bond market participants and the like might look at it.
One
thing that bothers me about continuing with the current approach, even
though I can understand the arguments for it, is the sense in the
Bluebook that we're setting a policy based upon our projection of what
we expect to happen--of what is pretty much achievable based upon our
rigorously accurate forecasting abilities in these areas. We see what
is going to happen and we say:
Well, we should set the target there.
Whereas I like the idea of forcing us to think about a long-term
objective and then achieving it.
Of course, in part this is a little
different perspective. Despite the imperfections in M2, as I read it
M2 grew a little over 3 percent last year as did nominal GDP.
And I
tend to think that M2 will come back this year because a lot of these
factors will open up.
As Jerry said yesterday, the banking system and
some of the credit crunch issues are opening up and I think the RTC is
near the end of the road; many of those institutions have already been
squeezed.
I think one would expect the bulk of the yield curve effect
to come relatively early when the yield curve switches.
So, I
wouldn't be surprised to see a catch-up.
The way the Bluebook puts it
is, on page 18:
"The tunnel approach in 1992 would be appropriate if
last year's shortfall in M2 was seen as associated with an undesirable
shortfall of income"--and I would define a recession as an undesirable
shortfall of income--"or transitory shifts in the demand for money."
I have a feeling that we're going to get some catch-up on that.
I do
agree with the general sentiment that there are advantages to
flexibility. Those in decision-making positions always will prefer
flexibility to being bound. And I do think there is a problem in how
people would interpret this at the current time. But more generally I
would agree philosophically with the notion, especially once we get
out of this period in which I think we have some temporary problems
with M2, of trying to put us under a bit more pressure and committing
to some longer-term ranges.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.
MR. KOHN.

Anybody else?

[What about]

questions of Don?

I was hoping you had forgotten me!

MR. PARRY.
Don, the Bluebook indicates that the growth of M2
would be 3-1/2 percent, assuming that there is a downward shift in the
demand for money of similar magnitude to that experienced in 1991.
If
there were not such a downward shift and we had a continuation of the
experience of 1991, what would be the model's forecast of M2 growth?
MR. KOHN. Well, the standard model would have it something
close to 6 percent with a 5 percent GDP; that's because it would still
be getting some push from interest rates early in the year.
Our yield
curve model, however, has been doing a bit better these past few
years, although it has been missing; it would have [M2] growth more on
the order of 4 percent.
So, I would tend to split the difference in
the models and tell you something like 5 percent on M2 to get 5
percent GDP.

2/4-5/92

At the beginning of
MR. PARRY. Now, the tough question:
1991 you had some feelings about the probabilities of these forces
continuing in 1991.
You obviously in this Bluebook have some
How strong are they this time?
convictions about that as well.
Governor Mullins indicated he thought that these effects may not be as
strong as you think they are.
MR. KOHN. Well, as I indicated in my briefing, I think 3-1/2
percent growth is our best shot.
MR. PARRY.

Right.

MR. KOHN. But if there were a risk to this, I think it might
be that we could get a little more M2 growth or something like the
FOMC [members' forecasts of] GDP, which is higher than the Greenbook
GDP.
And it would be because of the fact, as Governor Mullins
mentioned, that [the effects of] some of the initial shifts in the
yield curve may be wearing out and so forth.
I guess to some extent
we're perhaps a little gun-shy on this because those are arguments
we've been using for the last six months about why banks in response
would have higher-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Not necessarily.

MR. KOHN. It's true that velocity was unchanged in 1991.
But it took an incredible decline in short-term interest rates to keep
it unchanged.
And all our past relationships in models and charts and
whatnot would suggest that that would give you a huge decline in
velocity--a lot of M for a little bit of GDP--and we didn't get that.
Now, some of that may unwind a bit this year, but our best guess is
that the credit for the expansion in the staff forecast, which I think
is an entirely credible one, would basically come from outside
depository institutions. Most of it is going to come through the
capital markets. So, I don't see loan demand picking up at banks or
Certainly,
thrifts; they're still on the securitization route.
marginal banks and thrifts under the new banking law are under
tremendous pressure--even more pressure than they were before--to
downsize to get their capital up.
So, I don't see those credit
conditions deteriorating; I also don't see them snapping back a lot.
And I think there are still a lot of portfolio shifts coming that we
haven't seen yet.
A lot of small time deposits [that depository
institutions] put on a couple of years ago are just maturing.
MR. PARRY. This 3-1/2 percent certainly would be something
that one could use to support a recommendation of alternative II, if
one had considerable certainty. To the extent that one moved more
toward the kinds of comments that Governor Mullins made, one would
tend to look more favorably on alternative I or even conceivably
alternative III.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the problems that the current
period is creating with respect to the money supply is that we are
going through this extraordinary turmoil with the virtual dissolution
of a big chunk of the savings and loan industry. We have all sorts of
abnormal aspects with respect to holdings of liquidity. It strikes me
that our major focus at this stage has to be to understand the very
short run of where we want to be on money supply, largely because we
know so little about what is going on. The "Virginia Plan" and all

2/4-5/92

-40-

the [other] tunnel-type plans presuppose precisely the opposite:
That
we are feeling sufficiently comfortable with respect to these
relationships that we can project further out and make available to
the public a plan to which we intend to adhere.
I wish we were under
those conditions. Were we in that position, I would feel quite
comfortable about locking in longer-term commitments in a sense to
bind us so that we don't get off a particular track.
My difficulty, knowing all of the technical problems that are
associated with the relationships between money on the one hand--and
liquidity for which it is a proxy--and gross domestic product, is that
our state of knowledge in that sequence at this stage has not been so
poor in many years. Also, I would be very hesitant to lock into a
tunnel because I'm fearful that we might find that all of a sudden
[relationships have gotten] back to some form of normal [at a time
when] we are outside the tunnel.
It would then take us an awfully
long time to work our way back unless we took the whole tunnel and
changed it up or down, which would be the worst of all possibilities.
I don't know how we could find our way back, whereas the procedures we
have at the moment at least enable us to start from scratch in early
February. Despite all of our intellectual, analytical problems, which
may have been totally unresolvable with respect to policy in the
previous year and created a base drift, at least in a sense we can
always start from scratch and struggle from where we are rather than
try at that stage to work our way back and absorb mistakes that we
made analytically two years earlier or something.
It creates major
problems if we are wrong. Obviously, if we are not and we can stay
within the tunnel, it is very effective.
But I ask myself the
question:
What do we do if we're wrong?
And I say if we're wrong and
we have cones, we can adjust far more readily than we can if we have a
tunnel.
I would be very hesitant to go to a tunnel unless we felt
confident that [money] were not going to veer substantially outside
the ranges of a tunnel.
And at this stage I frankly can't feel secure
in that respect, knowing our terrible difficulties in trying to
forecast M2 on the basis of all our previous models.
MR. PARRY. The trouble is that when we're wrong we are
sometimes reluctant to make the change in that new year to compensate
for that wrong.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is a problem and that's the
advantage of this [tunnel concept].
But I should certainly think in
the context of what Jerry Corrigan was saying--namely form versus
substance--that if we have enough understanding to know the
difference, we would make certain our policy is formulated on the
basis of substance and not on the position of where a dot is on some
particular chart that we built.
MR. PARRY. We came in with less [growth] in nominal terms
than was expected. We saw real growth that was significantly less
than forecast in July, but there's probably not going to be much
discussion about that history and its implications for what we might
want to do in 1992.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the question is:
Why isn't there?
Well, let me put it this way:
What is it you want to put on the table
that the rest of us--

-41-

2/4-5/92

MR. PARRY.

No, I'm not--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
whole episode.
MR. PARRY.
targets for 1992?

I think we're all acutely aware of that

But again:

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Does it affect how we construct

Yes.

That's my view.

My view on that is that there's a strong
MR. MULLINS.
However, I wouldn't support
intellectual case for moving the cone up.
So, I think the way
that case because it would send the wrong signal.
to handle it is to do what the Chairman suggests, which is to
recognize an intention to be at the upper end of the cone next year.
But this is the difficulty; it gives us flexibility but it's more [in
the nature of] hypothetical flexibility.
MR. PARRY. In the Bluebook the implications were that we had
to reduce interest rates by a fair amount--did you say 3/4 of a
So, that is the issue
percentage point?--to achieve that.
[unintelligible] discussion that [unintelligible] relying on what
happened last year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

That's real substance!

That's real substance!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's real policy!

MR. BLACK. But no matter what form we select, we're always
going to have serious doubts about how much we need to move the
federal funds rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLACK.

these

Oh, I believe that!

[Laughter]

We're never going to know the answer to that!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Nobody is saying that either one of
[approaches] is going to solve that.

MR. BLACK. Well, that's the really difficult issue and the
reason I wish we could develop some other control mechanism, but I'll
be darned if I know what else we can do.
Most of M2 is not reservable
and, given the market's proclivity for designing new instruments that
would avoid any reserve requirements we put on existing instruments-if indeed we did--unless we paid interest rates on the reserves, which
That would certainly make it legally
is a political problem....
controllable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.
that mode?

President Melzer.

I wanted to ask Don a question; are we still in

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

-42-

2/4-5/92

MR. MELZER. Don, what M2 growth would you consider
consistent with price stability based on what we think longer-term
relationships are?
Is it the 3-1/4 percent in strategy II?
MR. KOHN.
MR. MELZER.

Right.
In the out years is that--

MR. KOHN. That largely reflects some remaining--questionable
in Jerry's terms--interest rate elasticity. That is, nominal interest
rates are coming down so that you'd have to get a little extra [money
growth].
If you believe the P* model and the assumption of a constant
P* and the economy is growing at 2-1/4 percent--our current estimate
of what the capacity of the economy is--presumably M2 over a long
period of time would have to grow something on that order as well.
MR. MELZER. Well, what if [unintelligible]
zero measured inflation?

will not accept

MR. KOHN. That would give you more like 3 or 3-1/4 percent,
if you thought 1 percent measured inflation were equivalent to price
stability.
MR. MELZER.
I have this view that, if we adjust our cones
over the years, I don't want to get into a position where we need to
move them back up if we can avoid it.
Ideally, in a perfect world
we'd like to ratchet those things down gradually, getting to a cone
that's consistent in the long run with price stability. If we missed
our cone, we'd explain why; but I don't envision a world in which
we're juggling these things around. And I was trying to get some feel
for how much further we have to go; probably we'd have to ratchet it
down another percentage point, maybe a little more.
MR. KOHN. Yes, I think you're right about the price level
and the measurement problems.
So, I would say a range of about 1 to 5
percent would probably do it for you. We used to worry about what
would happen as we approached price stability and nominal interest
rates fell and we'd have this surge into M2 [assets] so that in order
to keep the economy from plummeting at that point we'd have to pump in
some more liquidity to meet that demand. But we've had our decline in
nominal interest rates without a surge in M2, so perhaps this reentry
problem isn't so bad unless long-term rates come down and we end up
with 4 or 5 percent long-term rates with this thing. Then, all of a
sudden those bond funds won't look so attractive relative to a 2
percent OCD or NOW account rate and we could get a surge of funds back
into M2.
So, there might be complications as we approach price
stability, but I think your sense of around 3 percent in a steady
state is probably [right].
MR. MULLINS.
Do we have studies on the drift problem, the
measurement problem, with zero inflation? You mentioned 1 percent.
MR. KOHN. There have been studies.
I heard Bob Gordon give
a paper at the Tokyo Conference--Dick Syron and Ed Boehne were there-and his view was that something between 3/4 and 1-1/4 percent, given
his sense of distortions, was about right.

-43-

2/4-5/92

At some time it might be useful to explore that
MR. MULLINS.
issue in more detail because we are getting within shouting distance.
Governor Mullins, as you know, we distributed to
MR. PRELL.
all of the FOMC members a paper by Dave Stockton and colleagues which
included a discussion of that issue, and there's further work being
done.
But we do have something that has gone out to the Committee.
[Unintelligible] very imperfect. The
MR. CORRIGAN.
technical data are interesting both in the context of Dave Mullins's
If you look at the actual
question and Tom Melzer's last question.
targets for M2 going all the way back to '83, once we got out of the
recession, they have come down from 6 to 9 percent to 4 to 8 percent,
to 3 to 7 percent, and to 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent. But if you look at
the actual growth rates, in the first part of the period we had a base
drift on the high side and in the second part a base drift on the low
side.
I think for that period as a whole we probably end up about
having washed it all out.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. CORRIGAN.

You'd end up with an historical tunnel.
That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I guess we've proceeded as far as we're
going to go on questions.
It would now be useful to have each member
and other presidents state very simply of these various alternatives
where they would like us to come out.
Who would like to start?
MR. FORRESTAL. I would start on the tunnel, Mr. Chairman, by
confessing to Mr. Lindsey and Mr. Black that I have spent very little
I only pass through occasionally, so I had no bias
time in Virginia.
one way or the other.
But I think the Chairman's points were well
taken. The other thing I would add, Mr. Chairman, is something you
It seems to me that to introduce this tunnel proposal
didn't mention.
at the time of the Humphrey-Hawkins report would raise an awful lot of
pressure and would be counterproductive in the present environment.
On the targets themselves, I would be very much in favor of
keeping the targets that we established last July. To change them in
To bring them down,
either direction would send the wrong signal.
which has obvious implications for price stability, is desirable in a
theoretical sense but would seem to me to lead to the interpretation
among market participants that we intend to moderate growth. And in
this environment that would not be very appropriate. On the other
hand, of course, raising them would give rise to the interpretation
that we've given up on our fight against inflation or at least are
moderating that attack. And that, too, would be the wrong signal to
I think stability in the targets is what is called for now, so
send.
I would like to keep both M2 and M3 where they were.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Basically, I agree with what Bob Forrestal said.
If you just took the staff forecast of M2 and M3, you could make an
But I
analytic case for reducing the ranges, particularly for M3.
So,
don't think that would be a very wise development at this time.
my preference would be to leave the money and debt ranges at the
I must admit that I would be
tentative levels that we set in July.

2/4-5/92

-44-

interested in talking about this subject of the tunnels again in July,
particularly after we've had an opportunity to look at some of the
more technical issues like the base, etc.
But at present I prefer to
stick with the cone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, the one time I dissented on
anything since you've been here was when we established the tentative
ranges in July of last year.
But we missed so badly because of base
drift, by virtue of this faulty procedure we use, that I think it
would be a mistake to do anything other than alternative I.
So, to
show my graciousness, I would argue that we ought to stick with
alternative I.

frankly.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Hoenig.

I wasn't aware you'd lost anything,

MR. HOENIG. Given the circumstances that we have today, I
would not be in favor of the tunnels.
I think what we have now does
give us the flexibility
we need to move toward price stability,
and
that's what should be our focus. As for the alternatives here, I am
in favor of alternative I for the reasons that have been given.
That
gives us the flexibility we need to continue to move toward price
stability, and to adopt either of the other alternatives I think would
give an incorrect signal at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

President Boehne.

Alternative

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I for all

the cogent reasons given.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I prefer alternative I; I could accept
alternative II.
First of all, I think alternative I is consistent
with strategy II,
which I believe in and I guess [other] people around
the table also do.
I just wanted to make one other point in
connection with this.
I think M2 is probably the best indicator we
have of concurrent economic activity. It gives us some sense of how
we're doing with respect to our goals.
I have some problem calling it
a target.
I don't want to get into a semantic debate and I wouldn't
suggest we change how we describe it, but in my view a good target is
not only something that relates to our goals but is also directly
controllable by our actions.
As I mentioned yesterday, the component
[of M2] we do control is only 25 percent of the total
and our ability
to indirectly influence [M2] through our influence on interest
rates
is questionable; I think the evidence that we've seen here recently
calls that into question. This isn't a proposal but I urge people not
to lose sight of things like reserves, the base, and narrow money that
we do directly influence because I think they give us some indication
of the thrust of monetary policy actions, which I don't think M2
really gives us.
In that connection, I get somewhat troubled when I
hear suggestions that we ought set as our longer-term goal somehow
getting M2 into the upper end of the range that we're setting because
if that happens under circumstances where we're getting no growth in
non-M1 components of M2, we're talking about 25 to 30 percent Ml
growth. One can scoff at Ml, but I feel very strongly that if we put
that kind of stimulus into the system over a period of 6 to 12 months,

-45-

2/4-5/92

we will have big problems. Now, if we get into the upper end under
different circumstances where M1 is much more controlled and some of
those other components are growing, that's a different story. Anyway,
I would urge that we not lose sight of those [measures]; I think we
need to pay attention to them. I wouldn't advocate a target but we
may even be at a point in time when we would want to monitor
consciously or explicitly the behavior of a narrower [measure] that
reflects the thrust of our objectives.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would you and Si be supportive of
proposing reserves across the board on the M2 components?
SPEAKER(?).

Good question.

MR. MELZER.
I don't know about the politics of that, Alan,
but that's something we ought to think about in terms of the longerterm influence of monetary policy--possibly reducing reserve
requirements and spreading them more broadly over broader classes of
deposits.
SPEAKER(?).

That's a good idea.

MR. KOHN. We have a letter from Chairman Neil on that issue
and I'm sure you'll be asked to address it at your Humphrey-Hawkins
testimony.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We continue to
advocate a policy to achieve price stability, and the recent slowdown
in inflation suggests that we're on track.
To continue a gradual
approach to that objective we would expect some downward shift in the
M2 band in 1992.
But we really don't know how long it will take or
how big it will be.
Ideally, in the year ahead we would prefer an M2
target range of 1-1/2 to 5-1/2 percent because that range corresponds
more or less to our desired M2 growth by year-end, if conditions
The ranges are wide enough to accommodate some makeup from
warrant.
last year's shortfall. As a practical matter, we could live with the
ranges expressed in alternative II.
We'd inch down the ranges and
remind markets of our [intent] to achieve price stability over a
reasonable period of time. Recognizing our recent progress in
reducing the M2 growth trend, lowering the target range to center on a
4 percent midpoint would in our opinion enhance the credibility of our
commitment to our long-term objective of reducing inflation.
With respect to the tunnel approach, we were prepared to
comment on it.
As a matter of fact, we prepared an "Ohio Plan"
handout.
But as I listened to the discussion, I found that all the
questions were answered and all the comments were made, so our plan
wouldn't add much to the discussion. But we are interested in seeing
a different approach at least kept on the table.
MR. LINDSEY.

You know, Ohio has been part of Virginia, too!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

MR. CORRIGAN.
I favor the alternative I tentative ranges
from last year. I would certainly tolerate growth in the upper half

-46-

2/4-5/92

of the range if it could materialize in a context of developments in
inflation and economic activity that are otherwise satisfactory.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
On a long-run basis, alternative II is clearly
my preference. Real GDP between 1991 and 1996 grows at a 2.6 percent
percent average annual rate under alternative II, which is just 0.2
percentage point lower than the 2.8 percent path under alternative I.
Now, I know we don't have clear insight that these are accurate paths.
I guess Don Kohn doesn't claim clear insight that these are accurate
out [that far], but I do think this expresses exactly what we know to
be the long-run relationship between monetary policy and economic
growth.

So,

if I could end

up in 1996 with zero inflation....

While

we have 3/4 of a percent in the Bluebook table, clearly that falls
within my notion of what zero inflation would be; I would guess that
3/4 to 1-1/2 percent would probably be real zero inflation if we
measured properly.
So, I have a clear preference for alternative II.
I would admit, Mr. Chairman, that politically I think February 1992 is
not a good time for you in your Humphrey-Hawkins report to announce
this. Even though it would be a wonderful economic presentation and
education, I think it would not be desirable for you to do that. And
I can't imagine your wanting to do that.
So, I will accommodate
myself to one more year of begrudgingly voting for and accepting
alternative I. But I do want us to be [where alternative II takes
us].
And I do agree with Bill Hendricks and Tom Melzer that we must
keep our vision on price level stability.
Indeed, in the
circumstances that we're in, that clear commitment to price level
stability in the Humphrey-Hawkins report will do more to keep longterm rates down and I believe will give us a better growth path than
we would get if we appear to be willing to re-inflate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
On the narrow issue, I would favor alternative
I, and I would also favor and support the Vice Chairman's comments on
being willing to tolerate growth in the upper end of the ranges under
satisfactory economic and inflation circumstances.
More generally, I
think we're moving into new territory where considering these issues
will be different than it was when we had ranges of 6 to 9 percent.
We're nearing the end of a long and successful journey of ratcheting
down these ranges and we're approaching a steady state. And I think
we need to revisit the issue of how we operate in a steady state and
what it is.
But I support alternative I for next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Let me just ask President Hoenig
something.
You indicated a preference for alternative I. Would you
associate that with these remarks about tolerating the upper end of
the range for that?
MR. HOENIG.

Yes.

MR. ANGELL.

Mr. Chairman, I didn't; I would not.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]
President Syron.

That's clear and I did not ask you!

-47-

2/4-5/92

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I also would be in favor of
alternative I because, like everyone else, I have no confidence in
what is going to happen in the future to return M2 growth to its
"normal path."
Since you asked specifically, I would be much more
willing to be close to the edge at the upper side than the low side.
In fact, I think that may be necessary and be consistent with what we
So, given my own guess on what is going to
have in the economy.
happen to velocity, I would hope that we're at or toward the upper
It is essential that all this be taken in the
part of the range.
context of continued progress toward price stability. As an add-on
comment, I don't agree with Tom Melzer's enthusiasm for Ml and in that
regard I would be enthusiastic about doing something to impose reserve
requirements more broadly across the components of M2.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN.
I, too, favor alternative I. On the question of
where M2 ought to be within the range, I'm a little more conservative
than some.
M2 growth over the last 5 years has averaged a little over
4 percent, if I read those revised data [correctly].
If that's right,
it seems to me that we ought to be careful about letting it veer very
far from that on the up side lest we risk compromising what we have
already put in place in terms of progress [toward] price stability.
I
don't think that's going to dissipate very quickly, but I believe we
need to be sensitive to that.
Clearly, there are some circumstances
under which I would find more rapid M2 growth acceptable, but I'm
urging a bit of caution at this point.
Just to state the obvious, we
always, so far as I know, accept a wide range of incoming information
before deciding those kinds of questions. And as long as we continue
to follow that policy, I guess I won't be troubled.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I would be in favor of alternative
I. For the reasons we've articulated today and in any number of other
meetings it seems to me that the [historical] relationships have
broken down. As a consequence, to make a change would imply a greater
degree of confidence in the aggregates than we currently have, at
least in an operative sense. Moreover, if we were to make a change,
either up or down, it would convey a policy message that I think at
this particular point would be very inappropriate. So, I would be in
favor of alternative I.
As to where we might end up in the range, it's awfully early
in the year to try to determine that.
It does seem to me that in an
operative sense we are really driving policy off a different
measurement anyway. And I'd like to see how the economy seems to be
developing as we get further into the year before trying to determine
just where in the range M2 might properly be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I share President Black's good
grace, and I concur with the obvious consensus for alternative I.
With regard to where we end up in that range. I'd like to avoid a
normative statement and make a positive statement. If we do not get
the velocity shock, if the staff forecast of inflation is correct, and
if in fact the economy has resumed growth as we think it might have

2/4-5/92

-48-

because of the money in the pipeline, then two meetings from now with
2.8 percent real economic growth we will not only be in the upper half
of the target range, we will be at the very top of the target range.
And I would be very interested in what the Committee decides in May
should that come to pass.
Thank you.
MR. CORRIGAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I have a strong personal
preference for alternative II.
I think we have a precious opportunity
here to press the attack on inflation, and the inflationary trend
under alternative II is much more appealing to me than the rather slow
progress under alternative I. I understand the pain in the growth
rate [of the economy] and the unemployment figures that are consistent
with that.
And I understand the institutional risks that are probably
inherent in making a change of that kind at this point in time. I
believe that alternative II gives us enough range and enough
flexibility to pursue an intelligent monetary policy that would not
overly inhibit the growth of the economy. I'm just afraid that if we
don't press the attack now, [inflation] may get away from us in the
final analysis. Having said all of that, in order to clear my
conscience, I am prepared to vote for alternative I. But, like
Governor Angell, I would be very unhappy if the actual growth in M2
were anywhere near the top of the cone.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.
I basically agree with Governor LaWare. My real
preference would be for alternative II but, for reasons that Governor
Angell mentioned and those that Governor LaWare called "institutional
risks," as a practical matter I would opt for alternative I right now.
But I, too, would like us to try to stay as close to the middle of the
target range as we can.
I think any inflection point in the growth of
money supply is a shock to the system, and I don't see any point in
going above or below [the midpoint] right now. I think we should
always be moving asymptotically, if that is the word, toward the
middle of the range.
MR. KELLEY.
MR. BLACK.

You didn't learn that last week at A&M did you?
I guess it's a Boston thing!

MR. MCTEER.
On the tunnel, I don't know what Sam Houston
would think of the tunnel, but I have more sympathy for it than most
of the people [who have spoken], especially if it were bent down at
the end of next year to 3-1/2 percent.
It would give us a tunnel
that's very much like the tunnel that connects these two buildings,
which works very well.
It would eliminate base drift, and I don't
believe it would be received badly by the financial markets.
I think
it would do two things that would be favored:
One, it would indicate
our willingness to speed up the rate of growth of money in the short
run, which I think is needed; and, two, it would cap the rate of
growth in the long run, which I think is needed.
So, I hope we will
revisit this issue soon.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

-49-

2/4-5/92

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I think this discussion has
bracketed the situation very well.
The higher ranges are simply a
non-starter.
The lower ranges are where we want to go but probably
are not desirable now, which leaves us with the same ranges, those of
alternative I. And that's certainly what I would support.
As far as
going into the upper part of the ranges, without enthusiasm I could
support that for what I hope would be a fairly brief period of time.
But I'm not enthusiastic about it or lusting after that.
As for the tunnel versus the cone approach, I have a lot of
sympathy with the tunnel idea. But I concur with your suggestion that
this probably is not a good time to adopt it.
I'd like to see it stay
on the table; I'd like to see us watch it closely and look at some
different ways to do it and have it be a continuing part of the
dialogue.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. As the native Virginian, it seems to me that
elements of the Virginia Plan-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

These two carpetbaggers!

MS. PHILLIPS. Right, these carpetbaggers.
I do have
sympathy for the tunnel plan, and I'd like to see it continue to be
discussed and kept on the table because I think it is better for the
long run. As a person who has not spent as much time on monetary
policy matters as on other policy matters, I've noticed a tendency
that whenever the time is inappropriate to make a change that's when
it's on the table and is brought forward. If we were at the midpoint
of the range, it probably would not be as much of an issue.
I think
it's very difficult to make policy changes when you're at the middle;
there's just not an incentive to do it.
I do understand the politics
of the situation, so, like several others who have spoken, I'd like to
see the tunnel plan remain on the table for discussion, particularly
for looking at the long-range policy implications.
I could support alternative I. Maybe I'm not even as
optimistic as some; I'd like to see us get to the middle of the cone
but I certainly could tolerate going to the upper parts of the ranges.
If growth does get to the upper part of the range, I'd be willing to
bet that there will be a discussion then for tightening. So, it will
be interesting to follow this discussion as we move into the year.
SPEAKER(?).

I hope so.

MR. CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I wonder if it might be a good
idea for Governor LaWare to repeat briefly what he said when you were
out of the room.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

I took notes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
but- -

Sure.

He said he preferred alternative II,

2/4-5/92

-50-

MR. LAWARE.
I said I personally preferred alternative II
because I thought we had a precious opportunity right now to pursue
the attack on inflation. And the [Bluebook] trend line under
alternative II in winning that fight against inflation sooner rather
than later was very appealing to me.
I was afraid that if we stuck
with alternative I, the inflation objective might escape us.
I'm well
aware of the pain involved with regard to the [economic] growth rate
and the unemployment numbers. But it seems to me that the long-term
public policy interest might better be served by pursuing alternative
II.
At the same time, I think there are significant institutional
risks in making that kind of change at this time, even though the
ranges [of alternative II] probably give us enough flexibility to do
whatever we want to do with monetary policy.
So, I would vote for
alternative I, but like Governor Angell, I would prefer to stay toward
the lower part of the range described rather than allow a drift up to
the top.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, let me make the following
proposal. First of all, there is obviously sufficient interest in
pursuing the tunnel proposal to keep it on the table and keep it on
the agenda. We will look at it.
That would essentially [address]
Governor Phillips' concern, on which I think she is quite right:
namely, that when things are easy and normal and you don't think
there's a problem, then you don't spend any time on it.
But let's
make sure that we do and do that readily by putting it on the agenda
the next time this issue comes up, and keep it there until we lose
interest in it or decide to use it.
Let's keep it in a context where
it can be an alternative.
Secondly, it's clear that we have a large majority of the
voting members in favor of alternative I, with a majority willing to
accept--should it occur as a result of market forces--growth in the
upper end of the range.
But in our official statements relative to
this, I think it's important that we insert in our [explanation] that
we do not wish to lose the gains that we have achieved with respect to
price stability and that our actions with respect to monetary policy
over the long run will be very sensitive to that particular [issue].
What that implies in actual action is that we might accept [growth in]
the upper portion of the cone, but with some reluctance, and certainly
not as a permanent phenomenon.
So, what I would like to put on the
table for a vote at this point is alternative I with language in the
Humphrey-Hawkins report somewhat similar to the way Jerry put it, but
including immediately thereafter a comment that the gains in price
stability have been extremely valuable to this economy and that it's
certainly our strong desire--or some [wording] even much more
formidable than that--to make certain that those gains not be
dissipated.
I won't give you exact language but in rough form would
ask if that is acceptable to the Committee to vote on.
MR. ANGELL. I have a question, Mr. Chairman.
Isn't there
some danger in that?
I agree that the majority of the voting members
would accept the upper part of the range.
But if we said that in the
Humphrey-Hawkins report, doesn't that then put us in the position of
appearing to have [that as the] actual desired range?
Suppose money
growth is weaker than we anticipate. Even though we might end up,
let's say, cutting the fed funds rate one or two times, we might still
have weak growth. Would that not then cause our critics in Congress

-51-

2/4-5/92

You really acted as if you wanted to be in the upper
to say to us:
end and then you didn't [even] get to the middle.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I think we would be subject to
But the language that Don or
that [criticism] no matter what we did.
the Vice Chairman used I don't think puts us into that position.
We're not saying we're going to force [money growth] into the upper
part of the range; but if market forces were to do that, we would not
be acting strenuously to push it down.
MR. MELZER. There would be no reason for people to presume
that we would be anyway if growth were in the range.
Isn't that
right?
Well, I would hope so, but one doesn't
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
know. There's another alternative.
We can leave it out of the
official text and I could use that in the questions and answers-MR. ANGELL.

I would prefer that.

MR. CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

I would, too.
Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Why don't we leave it out then
and I will, if the issue surfaces, find appropriate language in the
Q&A portion of the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony to put that on the
table.
MR. PARRY.
In your statement about the ultimate objective of
price stability or something close to it, would it be well to
underline the fact that in subsequent years this would most likely
require further declines in our targets?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If that comes up in the Q&A, I would
answer in the affirmative; I have in the past.
MR. PARRY.

I'm thinking of a conditioning for what might

become--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I suspect it has been true of all
of us when that issue has come up. We've all indicated that the
particular range we're in at the moment is not necessarily by any
means our view of [the range that is consistent with] price stability.
Okay, could somebody move this?
MR. SYRON.

So moved.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

MR. BERNARD.
The directive would read--I'm reading from page
24 of the Bluebook--:
"The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output.
In furtherance of these
objectives, the Committee at this meeting established ranges for
growth of M2 and M3 of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent and 1 to 5 percent,

2/4-5/92

-52-

respectively, measured from the fourth quarter of 1991 to the fourth
quarter of 1992.
The monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt was set at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for the year.
With regard to M3, the Committee anticipated that the ongoing
restructuring of depository institutions would continue to depress
growth of this aggregate relative to spending and total credit.
The
behavior of the monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in
the light of progress toward price level stability, movements in their
velocities, and developments in the economy and financial markets."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
First Vice President Hendricks
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Syron
adjourn

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[temporarily].

Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Okay, I think coffee is outside.

Let us

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Bill, you asked for the floor.

MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Since the vote and
during the recess, I've been thinking about the presentational
difficulties that you might have and that, from your view, unanimity
on the 1992 targets is the desirable thing. We're willing to support
the present targets, and I would therefore request that my vote be
changed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Thank you.
I think it is important that
we have unanimity where we can in this particular period, with the
turmoil and politics going on and swirling around us.
A perceived
division within this FOMC is something we should try to avoid if we at
all can. This would be helpful and I will declare the vote unanimous.
Let's move now to Don Kohn.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

[Statement--see

Questions for Don?

MR. ANGELL.
Don, I guess this is a question for Ted Truman
as well as for you.
When we look at the real exchange value of the
dollar, I presume we do not make any attempts to adjust for
differences in the measurement of inflation in the United States
versus that in the other G-7 countries.
If most of us tend to believe
that we might be as much as 1 percentage point off on our measurement

2/4-5/92

of inflation, over a period a time that 1 percentage point compounded
could give us quite a distortion in terms of the real exchange value
of the dollar.
Well, I think there are two factors. One is the
MR. TRUMAN.
question as to relative distortion that you want to focus on. I guess
a priori my view would be that in some sense the relative distortion
would be larger in the major industrial countries abroad than it is
here. We probably spend more time purifying our CPI than do some of
the other industrial countries, which biases [their estimates] in the
other direction. Moreover, just in the short run, we have a
phenomenon because what we use here are consumer price indexes. There
It's like everything else:
are cases for using other price indexes.
It depends on what you are trying to prove.
There's nothing perfect.
Certainly, in the short run, we have had a situation where there have
been a number of shocks to the consumer price level abroad. These are
the result in the last couple of years of excise tax increases and
things like that:
for example, [goods and services] tax in Canada,
the [value added] tax in the United Kingdom, etc.
So, the foreign
price level, in a truly competitive sense, is probably somewhat
inflated relative to the CPI measures. And that goes back for the
last couple of years.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that in places like Japan, by
using rents as the equivalent to owner-occupied homes and then having
rent control, they understate their rate of inflation.
MR. TRUMAN.
I think that's a possibility. We looked at it a
couple of months ago [and] we were not convinced that it was as
understated as you suspect it may be.
MR. ANGELL.

All right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I wanted to ask you a question.
you think that there is in the market and the Congress a tradeoff
between what we do and their enthusiasm for fiscal policy?

Do

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think there's some. There's a view in
the market that if it is perceived that the Fed is shut down and won't
be doing anything more, that will induce increased fiscal activity, so
to speak, on the Hill.
I don't know whether it's true; it's hard to
It's probably true in part. How important it is, I really
judge.
don't know. A number of people believe that in the market; I think
that is a fact.
MR. PARRY. If rates were cut 50 basis points, would it alter
the dialogue, the momentum, etc?
I think there's something
I'm not sure.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
to it, but I would not want to move policy on the presumption that it
might create a more balanced fiscal policy.
I frankly doubt it.
Any
further questions for Don?
Well, why don't I get started.
I think the issue of the
extent of monetary policy [easing still] in the pipeline can be looked
at in a somewhat different way. And it, too, suggests some effects

2/4-5/92

-54-

but it is by no means complete.
If we judge that the major problem
confronting us is the balance sheet strain created by the rise in debt
and, in certain instances, by a fall on the asset side of both
household and business balance sheets, the business balance sheets
obviously would have to fall in value in substantial part because of
[declines in] real estate. Any decline in values on the asset side of
the household sector is rather [questionable].
Obviously, there's a
belief that residential real estate values have fallen, but that's
very hard to prove.
I think it is the case that equities have
declined some as debt has eaten into the value of real estate, but
it's not by any means obvious that it's on the asset side.
What I think is essentially the case here is that the debt
overhang is creating a diversion of disposable personal income on the
one hand and corporate cash flows on the other more toward repairing
balance sheet relationships rather than consumption and investment
expenditures. And this may be showing up in some increase in the
saving rate, but that remains to be seen. Obviously, in the month of
December the [published] saving rate at 5.8 percent is a very weak
statistic, and the range of error is considerable. Nonetheless, it is
consistent with the employment of disposable income for the reduction
of debt and, therefore, an increase in the net equity of households-meaning saving rather than consumption expenditures.
This implies, as we've discussed before, that [households and
businesses] need to repair these balance sheets as a necessary
condition to initiate expansion. The evidence clearly suggests that
that is underway.
We are looking at a very significant amount of
corporate equity de-leveraging in a number of corporate balance
sheets. We are looking at a very high level of corporate debt
issuance, in part to refinance high interest debt but also presumably
to pay off short-term liabilities and improve the liquidity position
of the corporate balance sheets.
Now, clearly, the decline in
interest rates is showing up in the various [ratios of] interest costs
to cash flow both in the business and in the household sectors.
And
in that sense the debt burden is moving down.
So, one can clearly see
the impact of the combination of Federal Reserve policy on the short
end and decreasing inflation expectations on the long end beginning to
repair balance sheets in precisely the way one would presume that
markets trying to repair themselves would function. The question is:
How far has this gone?
I think the answer is that we don't really
know; it has gone part way, but there's no evidence that we're
anywhere near the point where a significant easing in [strains on]
balance sheets has occurred enough to restore the normal recovery
forces in the economy.
At this point, all the evidence suggests that output is
essentially flat. The weekly data that we have on industrial
production suggest that there was a decline in January but probably no
further follow-through in February. Indeed, it's possible that
February may be moving back. What one can say in general is that
while the balance sheets apparently are being repaired, the economy is
on hold; and there is no real evidence to suggest that that's about to
change quickly. I think the inflationary forces continue to recede,
and I would be not surprised to find that actual price data come in
under the Greenbook [forecast].
I hope that is, in fact, the case.
I
suspect that if we have any surprises in that area, that's probably
where they are going to come out.

2/4-5/92

-55-

This leads me basically to the obvious question of some
evidence of improvement in confidence, which a number of you mentioned
yesterday. And that strikes me as probably a reflection of previous
Federal Reserve actions, because we're not picking it up in any of the
We're getting it largely from more sophisticated
general surveys.
people who would be responding to the type of things we might be
doing. We are seeing evidence--at the moment mainly anecdotal but to
in housing sales and in
some extent real--in residential housing:
starts and permits. And that appears to be creating some positive
elements.
But for the moment we are reaching if in fact we are
stipulating that the economy has turned up. There is no evidence of
which I am aware that supports that view.
Nonetheless, it's my personal view that we probably have done
enough to put the economy on track eventually. But I'm willing to
acknowledge that we may not have. Since I think the probability that
we would want to move interest rates higher or tighten in the
intermeeting period approaches zero and that there is at least a nonnegative probability that we might want to ease during the period, I
would conclude--if that's the view of the Committee--that something
like alternative B, with normal asymmetric language toward ease is
appropriate, without specifying a presumption that any action is
contemplated during the period other than what one would assume under
the normal procedures with asymmetric language.
I put that on the
table for your reactions and would be curious to get the judgments of
President Syron.
other members.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I guess my longer-term objective
And
here is to have to vote for tighter policy as soon as possible.
that has something to do with how we behave in the interim period.
I'm inclined to agree that we have put a lot of stimulus in the
pipeline and that it's more likely that we're going to see an upturn
than a further slide. But I am concerned about [specifying] an
asymmetry of risks or costs [and] being wrong on one side or the
other.
We [are not sure] about the forecast, anyone's forecast. That
raises, of course, the issue of risks and insurance and how long one
I think we're going to have to wait a while to see data that
waits.
I do think, and
are really conclusive in one direction or the other.
Governor Phillips raised this point yesterday, that we may be in a
situation--I don't want to use the term "window"--where it's easier
for us to make a change now than it may be later as we come closer to
a season that may be seen as more political and also as we get into
Those things would
the midst of all this fiscal policy business.
argue for ease because I think we are in the midst of this long cycle
that we've talked about, and our role is to facilitate lending. The
best thing we can do to facilitate the long cycle adjustment is to
have a stronger economy.
Where all this leaves me at the end of the day is that I
would favor easing sooner rather than later. But I am aware of the
time in which we operate and I think we are in a period in which
there's a great deal of concern about confidence in the government as
a whole. That point is very well taken. And in that environment,
it's nice to see one organization that has some element of stability.
So, to tell you the truth, while I would prefer to ease now, short of
that, which we won't get [consensus on], I prefer strong asymmetry.
In this business of nuances, I'd find acceptable what you suggest but
would prefer the other side.

2/4-5/92

-56-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, given the prospect of a moderate
upturn at least incorporated in most of our expectations, I would
prefer alternative B.
I do think, though, that the uncertainties are
as you indicated, and that would lead me to be very supportive of
asymmetry to provide for significant further ease.
Two points with
regard to that:
It would be my view that if we were to ease, it
probably should be of some significance because public visibility for
the event would probably be desirable; secondly, my own feeling is
that it probably would be desirable for that ease to come sooner
rather than later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think the appropriate course
for monetary policy at the moment is to stay where we are.
As has
been indicated several times around this table over the past day or
two, there is a good deal of stimulus in the pipeline.
And as we look
back at our history, we certainly have made the mistake of overdoing
it on either side of the equation over time, and I hope we won't
repeat that mistake.
I think what we need at this time, as other
people have said, is some patience to let our policy feed its way
through to the economy.
So, I would support your recommendation of no
change at the moment and, therefore, I would support alternative B.
I
must say that before the meeting I was more inclined toward a
symmetric directive but, having reflected on it overnight, I think the
uncertainties in the forecast are such that we ought to be in a
position--you ought to be in a position--to move rapidly in the event
that incoming data indicate that that's the appropriate course of
action.
So, I, too, would support an asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I think this is a time for patience and watchful
waiting. On the question of symmetry or asymmetry, if I were voting,
I could accept either.
I agree with your logic that the chances of
tightening are essentially nil and that there is some chance for
easing. So, there is something to be said for asymmetry and I would
support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG.
I, too, am inclined to follow your
recommendation. First of all, I'd start by saying that there is a lot
[of stimulus] in the pipeline and we should be patient.
However, as I
mentioned yesterday, our projections are that the real economy might
actually grow more slowly than what is in the Greenbook forecast, and
that gives me some pause.
I also am concerned about the growth of M2,
which I think has been erratic and too slow. So, I am inclined to go
with "B" asymmetric toward ease, but I would wait until we have some
more information on the real economy and on M2 before I would charge
forward.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. We've had several years of moderate growth
and our view is that the inflation trend appears to be a decline to 3

-57-

2/4-5/92

percent and that it may be getting down even beyond that. We see the
that
basic thrust of policy as being consistent with that outlook:
is, 3 percent inflation in '92 and 2 percent, perhaps, in '93.
Therefore, we feel that the FOMC does have some room for further
easing if the policy action that was adopted in December does not
M2 seems to have been
stimulate growth in money and credit.
particularly erratic over the past month or so, making it difficult to
For the year
judge just what sort of growth track we're really on.
we'd like growth in M2 of 3-1/2 percent or so and we would not like to
see any significant shortfall from that path this quarter.
Consequently, we would like to see further easing in policy should the
Our
incoming data suggest that M2 is weakening from current levels.
position for now, however, is in line with the Greenbook projection
and your suggestion, Mr. Chairman. We would support alternative B
with asymmetry toward ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

I would prefer "B" symmetric, but I have
MR. MELZER.
If there were a
absolutely no problem with what you recommended.
presumption of another easing step in the asymmetry, I'd have a lot of
I agree with you that I don't think we can do
trouble with that.
anything with our policy that is going to affect what we get in fiscal
policy. The politicians are going to have to be seen to be doing
something, and they can't just stipulate that the Fed has taken care
So, I agree with your
of it and they don't have to do anything.
analysis on that.
The only other thing I would suggest--perhaps this is partly
tongue in cheek but not totally--is that we ought to get an
alternative C back in the Bluebook. We have recognized all along that
There's a
we were probably going to overshoot on the way down here.
statement in the Bluebook that was music to my ears about
unsustainably low real short-term interest rates. Now, they can
But, at any rate, I
become sustainable, I know, through two courses.
think we ought to get used to looking at an alternative C because
there could be circumstances where we're going to get some rope back,
and it might be better to move on that sooner in small steps rather
I have no problem with
than later and not let too much build up.
alternative C not being in there for this meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

Mr. Chairman, my personal preference would have
MR. LAWARE.
First of
been to have symmetric language with "B" for two reasons.
all, I have strong reservations about whether further ease in monetary
policy is going to affect the outcome significantly. And secondly,
symmetric language would tend to enforce a posture of patience on us
more rigidly. On the other hand, I accept the argument that we need a
safety valve of some kind here that can be used in the event that
circumstances change dramatically from what they are now.
Consequently, I can support your recommendation of "B," asymmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, to state the obvious, this is a
very difficult period to try to assess both the current as well as the

-58-

2/4-5/92

prospective environment. There may have been at least a miniimprovement in the balance from the last meeting but, as I said
yesterday, I still think the risks are very much on the down side at
this point.
And the policy directive should reflect that risk.
I
think it's perhaps too soon to ease again; moreover, we don't have a
credible basis on which we could make that kind of change. But if the
incoming data begin to show further deterioration, I'd move and I'd
move quickly. Therefore, I'd be in favor of your recommendation for
alternative B with asymmetric language toward ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

President Stern.

I would support your

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

recommendation.

President Black.

MR. BLACK.
I agree with you, Mr. Chairman.
I might point
out that Friday we will get the unemployment report and if we get a
surprise on that on the down side you could, of course, schedule a
conference call to decide what to do and where to go from there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

President McTeer.

I would support your recommendation, Mr.

Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I can certainly support your
recommendation. But I would like to indicate my strong preference, if
easing does appear to be appropriate, that we time it with more
forward-looking indicators and avoid creating the impression that
monetary policy is tied to the real economy.
If that [latter]
impression is developed, then the bond market will anticipate, rightly
or wrongly, that a rebound in growth means we're going to tighten.
Whereas if the monetary aggregates--and I might even mention commodity
prices--were to indicate the desirability of having a lower fed funds
rate, it would be clear that any easing that we do would really not be
easing in the sense that money growth was below target and we were
trying to keep monetary policy neutral by not pegging the fed funds
rate high.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. CORRIGAN.

"B,"

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.
asymmetric.
Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY.
Mr. Chairman, I am in concurrence with your
view. The one thing we all know is that we don't know. And given
that the uncertainties are high, we [ought] to go to the normal kind
of analysis, which is a loss function. I think the loss function is
much greater on the down side than on the up side.
Secondly, [we need
to ask]:
"How easily can we correct policy?"
Again, it's much easier
to correct policy if we are surprised on the up side than if we're
surprised on the down side.
So, I think you selected exactly the
right course of action.

-59-

2/4-5/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Governor Phillips.

I support your recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

And I will
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm clearly for "B."
support asymmetry as well because if there's a move in this period,
very clearly it's going to be on the easing side rather than on the
But I must say that I don't share the presumption
tightening side.
that we will ease that seems to be implied in conversations
speculating on how the timing will work.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I support "B," asymmetric.
And if we do get
evidence of deterioration or if we don't get some movement pretty
soon, I would favor seriously considering moving [toward ease].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. On the table is alternative "B,"
asymmetric. Would you read it, please?
MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
In the context of the Committee's
of pressure on reserve positions.
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint might or
slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the
intermeeting period.
The contemplated reserve conditions are expected
to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from
December through March at annual rates of about 3 and 1-1/2 percent,
respectively."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me just ask the question here
whether in this context "somewhat" or "slightly" is the appropriate
word. I would ask Don to refresh me on this.
MR. KOHN.
I thought as Norm was reading that the "slightly"
did tend to capture the sense that it wasn't an unusually strong-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You said it did?

MR. KOHN.
It did capture the sense. And perhaps if in your
judgment, Mr. Chairman, more than one move became necessary over the
intermeeting period, which is a long intermeeting period, I believe a
consultation with the rest of the Committee would be appropriate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I would certainly think that is correct.
I feel comfortable with the word "slightly" frankly, but I wanted to
make sure that that's appropriate.
MR. ANGELL.

Preferred.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan

Call the roll.

Yes

-60-

2/4-5/92

Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
First Vice President Hendricks
President Hoenig
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Syron
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.
meeting is March 31st, which is-MR. BERNARD.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

As been mentioned, our next

Eight weeks.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It's outside the March 20th deadline.
don't know what significance that has!
[Laughter]
MR. MULLINS.

I

About right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We now adjourn for lunch.

MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, may I remind you about the updates
of anyone's forecast?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I thought we did that yesterday.

MR. PRELL. Yes, and I wanted to raise the question about
fiscal policy assumptions. There seems to be some confusion about
what has been asked for.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh yes, my apology. There's an
interesting question about the basic assumptions implicit in the
forecasts of the Committee members and other presidents with respect
to fiscal policy.
I would suggest that we each make our own
assumption.
In a sense make it an endogenous calculation, rather than
have an imposed external presumption, because I'm not sure that's very
helpful and I'm not sure that we want to have an official position as
such. So, I would assume that each of you is making a forecast in the
context of how you believe the politics of what is going on may-MR. CORRIGAN.

We're allowed to do that!

MR. PRELL. We won't anticipate any particular indication of
what you are specifically assuming.
So it's [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay, we'll adjourn for lunch.
END OF MEETING

