Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 22, 1992

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Tuesday, December 22,
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

1992, at 8:00 a.m.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Hoenig
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Melzer
Mullins
Phillips
Syron

Messrs. Boehne, Keehn, McTeer, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Broaddus, 1/ Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Lindsey,
Promisel, Siegman, and Stockton, Associate
Economists
Mr. McDonough, Manager of the System Open Market
Account
Ms. Greene, Deputy Manager for Foreign
Operations
Ms. Lovett, Deputy Manager for Domestic
Operations
1/

President-elect.

12/20-21/82

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross,l/ Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill,2/ Associate Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn,2/ Senior Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Lindsey,2/ Assistant Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Balbach,2/ Burns,2/ T. Davis,2/ Eisenmenger,2/
Mullineaux,2/ Scheld,2/ and Stern,2/ Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Dallas,
Kansas City, Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Minneapolis,
respectively
Messrs. Broaddus,2/ and Soss, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Richmond, and New York
Ms. Meulendyke,2/ Manager, Securities Department, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
December 22, 1992
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. I think you all
know we have a luncheon for Bob Black that I hope everyone will be
able to attend.
I'd like to welcome Al Broaddus to his first meeting
at this table. We look forward to his joining us on a regular basis
starting with the next meeting as the newly installed President of the
Richmond Federal Reserve Bank.
There is nothing unusual about the agenda this morning so I'd
like to get started right from the top. Would somebody like to move
approval of the minutes of the November 17th meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

I'll move it.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
you're on for the Foreign Desk.
MR. MCDONOUGH.

Bill McDonough,

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I didn't have a chance to pick up the
cause of the runup in the dollar against the DM from 1.57 to 1.58 this
morning. What explains that?
MR. MCDONOUGH. A very, very thin market. There was a remark
by [Bundesbank President] Schlesinger, which seemed to give a more
bland approach to his view of inflation in Germany, that helped the
dollar; and then Bloomberg came in with a story interpreting what
Schlesinger had said in not such a positive view, so the dollar came
off a little.
But we have these very, very thin pre-holiday markets;
so if somebody sneezes, the exchange rate moves a half pfennig.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let's be very careful about sneezing in
this room! Any other questions?
If not, we shall move on to the
Domestic Desk, and Joan Lovett will bring us up to date.
MS. LOVETT.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Joan?

MR. JORDAN.
I've been following this sort of seesaw market
psychology and monitoring the Call during this last intermeeting
period, including how we responded to and interacted with that
shifting market psychology. Through the summer and into the beginning
of October, the dominant view seemed to be that the economy was weaker
than had been expected.
Confirmation of that weakness in the various
statistics that came out would lead the bond market to tend to
strengthen.
We tended to go with that strengthening. Then from
October 1st until, say, on or about the first Tuesday of November,
there was a significant backing up in market rates.
As I understand
that, the psychology was that it was increasingly likely that Clinton
was going to be elected and that we were going to get a fiscal package
that would be too expansionary and, therefore, it was adverse to the
market. Then something started to shift at that point.
I don't know

12/22/92

whether it was before or after our last meeting. Now we've been in a
period where even strong economic news does not cause the market to
sell off as it was doing before. Previously, any signs of strong
numbers on industrial production or anything that would come out would
tend to get an adverse reaction in the market. Don Kohn referred to
The idea
this one morning on the Call as the "new Clinton effect."
now is that strong economic news means we're not going to get a big
fiscal stimulus package. Therefore, it's a reason to rally whereas
If that's a good
before it would have been a reason to sell off.
characterization of what has been going on, how much more potential is
there for that kind of effect if we continue to get strong economic
Do you think the market is poised for a
news going into the new year?
further relief effect [based on the view] that we're not going to be
getting a massive dose of fiscal stimulus or maybe something worse
like a deficit-neutral package?
MR. MCDONOUGH. We think the view that Clinton is not likely
to have a bigger stimulus package than the $25 to $30 billion that
But what we're
Joan mentioned is probably fully in the market.
hearing now, especially in our morning dealer meetings, is the view
that the yield curve from fed funds out to about 2 years is too steep.
And we are beginning to get views, although not yet reflected in
trading positions because of the tight year-end period, that bonds in
So, if you listen to
the short end of the curve are very good buys.
what the dealers are saying, the market structure would say that we're
going to have a very strong economic recovery and that the Fed will
But
tighten about 25 basis points per quarter for the coming year.
when we talk to market participants and ask what they think is really
going to happen, they have a view that is very close to the staff
I'd say just in the last 10 days we have begun to hear
forecast.
people say that if this is what we believe the economy will do and the
yield curve is saying that there's much more economic growth and much
more Fed tightening than seems to make sense, there ought to be a bond
market rally. We are just beginning to hear that.
MR. JORDAN. The steepening that did occur in that period
from October 1st into early November was in the 2- to 3-year range.
Most of that has not come back out, whereas at the longer end we've
had some flattening.
MR. MCDONOUGH. Exactly. And that's why people who are
beginning to talk themselves into thinking that there is a great
buying opportunity are focusing on exactly that part of the curve.
I think there's another force that is
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
beginning to work here that we can see when we unbundle the whole
As you are all aware, there has
coupon yield into the 1-year futures.
been a very significant decline in [rates in] the 10- to 30-year area;
indeed, one is sensing that there is a really fundamental shift in the
outlook as reflected in the various positions along the yield curve.
What we may finally be seeing is a downward revision of long-term
inflation expectations. There may be a hope--and I underline the word
"hope"--that the budget deficit may be addressed in this particular
period because the only time that it can be [cut] is during the soI think there's a market expectation that
called "honeymoon period."
something fundamental may happen and that is being addressed in the
longer end of the market; and even though we're getting this upward
surge in the short end, it's more than offset on the long end and the

12/22/92

total effective yield in the 30-year coupon has been coming down.
I
think there is an intermediate cycle of the type that Jerry Jordan is
talking about which has been superimposed on that process.
If that is
true, then there may still be further downside rate possibilities in
the long end of the market. Indeed, what this is saying essentially
is that the yield curve is going to flatten and possibly flatten quite
significantly.
If, however, the honeymoon comes and goes and we get
the usual no action, then I think we're likely to see that go right
back where it was, or maybe worse.
MR. MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, there's also some play in the
market now because of the view that the new Treasury team may reduce
issuance in the 30-year area.
So, there is some attractiveness to the
30-year bond among those betting that that will happen, and some of
the higher yield or back-up in the 2-year note is the opposite effect
--that there will be more supply at the short end of the market and
less in the long end of the market. But I agree with your view of the
more basic thing that is happening.
MS. LOVETT.
It's worth noting that Jerry Powell told
everyone yesterday that as an outgoing Treasury official for debt
management he would advise the transition team not to make that
change.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Joan?
If not,
would somebody like to move to ratify the transactions since the last
meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. SYRON.

I move it.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Messrs. Prell and Truman.

Without objection.

MESSRS. PRELL and TRUMAN.

Let's now move on to

[Statements--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Did I hear you correctly when you said
that the gold exports in October appear to have come from the coffers
of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York?
Has anyone looked lately?
MR. TRUMAN.
this temple!

Well, I didn't want to tell too many secrets in

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Obviously, we knew what happened to
the gold, but I don't think we knew what it did to exports.
MR. TRUMAN.
What happens in the Census data is that the
Federal Reserve Bank of New York is treated as a foreign country.
[Laughter]
And when a real foreign country takes some of the gold out
of New York and ships it abroad, it counts first as imports and then
as exports. However, the import side is not picked up in the Census
data.
So there you get the export side of it.
MR. LAWARE.

Great accounting!

MR. BOEHNE.

Great confidence building!

12/22/92

MR. TRUMAN.
import documents!
MR. ANGELL.

That's because you haven't been filling out your

Let me

run this by

again.

You mean a country

owns gold and has it stored in the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
and if they ship it out, that's an export?
MR. TRUMAN. And in the balance of payments accounts it also
counts as an import, so it washes out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The Federal Reserve Bank's basement is a
foreign country. When they move it out of the basement into the
United States, it's an import. Then, when they ship it out again,
it's an export.
MR. ANGELL.

That makes sense!

MR. TRUMAN. And sometimes when they sell the gold, it might
be sold into the United States, so it should count as an import.
It
doesn't necessarily always show up as an export.
MR. BOEHNE.

That really clarifies it!

MR. KELLEY. Does it have to get out of your vault at all in
order to be considered an import and an export?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I'm not even going to try to
answer that.
In this particular case I know what happened, so I think
the description you have is correct.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Ted, I thought the Hooper-Johnson memo was
extremely interesting in a number of dimensions.
That shows that
[growth abroad] has more of an impact, obviously, in a polar-case
situation on U.S. growth than I would have thought intuitively. It is
a polar-case situation, but it shows the importance of exports.
I
wanted to ask you to give a horseback kind of guess:
If you didn't
have something as extreme as their situation is--which may be based on
a probability of less than 5 percent--but you could get to something
that had a probability of, say, 30 percent, where would that leave us?
Is it halfway between what we have in the Greenbook and what they had
in their note?
What would the impact of that be on growth in the
United States?
I didn't know how to interpret this; I don't know
whether it is a linear interpretation.
MR. TRUMAN. Essentially, it's linear.
If you want to say
the cutback in growth is approximately half of what we built into that
worst case scenario, the impact on U.S. growth would be roughly half.
I do think that memo in a way indicates that the worst case scenario
is more probable in 1993 than in 1994 just because, with the passage
of time, we are going to get more in the way of positive policy
responses than one would expect, although it becomes increasingly
possible to have two bad years as it is to have one.
I was surprised
at that, too, but the basic reason why we get a bigger impact than one
might intuitively have thought stems from two factors. One is the
dollar appreciation; that is quite substantial and it has a big
impact, which one doesn't normally associate with this kind of

12/22/92

scenario on a sustained basis.
Secondly, with income elasticity,
generally when you get above 1 you get a multiplication effect; things
begin to add up.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY.
Mike, I'm a little concerned about the signals
we're going to be getting next year if we have a particular fiscal
twist. If I listen to Little Rock right, what we should be doing is
moving social spending off the government's books and onto the books
of businesses. Let's suppose we did that; say there is $50 billion
less fiscal spending but mandated benefits of the same amount.
I
think of that as something like a lump sum labor tax. In my mind the
markets would interpret that as fiscal contraction and rates would
drop, but at the same time we would be seeing costs rise and perhaps
we'd be getting higher inflation numbers as a result.
Is that a
reasonable interpretation of what we'd be seeing?
MR. PRELL.

I don't want to venture a political judgment,

but-MR. LINDSEY.

No, it's a "what if" question.

MR. PRELL. I can't argue with the direction of what you're
saying. It would look like reduced budget deficits. That might be
favorable for the financial markets but they would also perceive the
cost-push and worry about it translating, unless monetary policy were
very restrictive, into ongoing higher inflation. So, it's hard to say
how that would net out as a bond market shock.
MR. LINDSEY.
inflation rates?

Would that cause a net increase in measured

MR. PRELL.
I think so.
I'm not sure what kinds of changes
you're assuming, but if they are mandated health care, mandated
expenditures on training--though I gather there may be some signs of a
backing away from that--they would enter the cost structure one way or
another and tend to be passed through.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There's also another way of looking at
it.
How that shifting of the net borrowing ex ante from government to
the private sector works its way out in the financial markets is also
related to this.
MR. LINDSEY.

In an ideal world, shouldn't it be a wash?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Not if the elasticity of the demand and
supply of funds is different between the two sectors, as it surely is.
MR. JORDAN.
It depends on its ultimate incidence:
How much
is borne by the workers in lower real wages and how much by the
shareholders--it could hit the stock market harder than the bond
market--versus how much is passed on to the consumers as prices. But
we don't know enough to answer that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
occurring today.

[Some of those effects]

obviously are

12/22/92

MR. LINDSEY. Bill, I don't see that [issue raised] at all in
the newspapers.
It is rather strange.
I see references to a chance
of fiscal contraction or $25 billion in extra spending, but I don't
see that mentioned at all as a possibility.
MR. MCDONOUGH. No, and we don't hear it discussed in the
market at all.
The assumption is that that which is virtuous on the
fiscal side will not be turned into anything negative in the private
sector.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. There is another possible way of looking
at this.
If the federal borrowing requirement is lowered and a cost
is imposed on the economy or on business, there's also the perception
And that would not
that economic activity will slow in the process.
fully offset the downward pressure on long-term rates that would occur
as a consequence of the reduction in the budget deficit.
MR. ANGELL. But that again depends upon the elasticity of
demand for the products.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It depends on the elasticity of demand
for financial instruments and the incidence of the costs and the
incoming productivity trends. The net effect of that has to be to
It's a tax and its effect really depends on what is done.
lower GNP.
MR. ANGELL. But it seems to me it's quite different if it
occurs in a period of sustained monetary restraint than if it occurs
in a period in which that monetary restraint is not in place.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

Any other questions?

MR. JORDAN. A couple of questions. First for Ted, regarding
your comments about the effects on [the United States] of [what is
happening in] Europe and elsewhere around the world:
Isn't it
I saw a press report about OECD
somewhat of a recursive process?
raising its forecast for the United States.
By the time that group
gets together for the next Working Party Meetings in Paris they will
hold up the prospects of a stronger '93, incorporate that in their
numbers, and raise their numbers.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, our forecast is somewhat weaker than the
recent OECD forecast and the IMF forecast released today that I heard
on National Public Radio. That is partly because we forecast more
often and have a faster turnaround in this process.
MR. JORDAN. But in their summer and fall estimates, wasn't
it the case that as the prospects of [growth in] the United States
came down these other countries were revising down their forecasts?
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, though I think on balance for all of them
including the staff [unintelligible] the U.S. story--although it
fluctuated up and down within a relatively narrow range over the last
12 months--has been their most accurate forecast, whatever consensus
one wants to take.
The one that has been the most [unintelligible]
has been Canada.
Whereas the Canadians, if you go back 12 months, for
obvious reasons were looking for a faster pickup in the first half of
this year than they actually had, that was one of the factors that
weighed on their marking things down [unintelligible].

12/22/92

MR. JORDAN. Let me turn to some questions for Mike about the
U.S. economy.
I was looking back over the last year--I haven't gone
back further--trying to understand the dynamics of the forecasts as
they are put together and the subsequent revisions.
A year ago at
this time the prospects were for the first quarter to be very, very
weak.
It came in considerably stronger than expected. The change
there, of course, between what had been expected and what occurred was
the most dramatic--much more so than even for the third quarter--and
tended to have the auto-regressive effect of raising the prospects out
into the future.
The second quarter then came in considerably
stronger than expected. At that time you revised down very sharply
the third-quarter numbers; I think we were all feeling in that AugustSeptember period that things were very, very much weaker than
expected.
Now we see that the third quarter came in considerably
stronger than those numbers, raising not only the reported number for
the third quarter--what we have so far--but the forecasts for the
fourth quarter and the first quarter of 1993, which also have been
revised up.
That worries me a bit.
If you look back at the third
quarter in particular and the reasons for having revised [your
forecast] down sharply, with the advantage of hindsight, were there
things that would have told you that it was still going to be quite a
strong quarter despite the news [indicating strength] in the second
quarter?
Could that forecasting error have been avoided if we had
looked at the right things?
MR. PRELL. Incidentally, the [revised] third-quarter GDP
number is 3.4 percent.
Maybe there was something; I don't know. If
there was, we missed it, obviously. Another possibility is that all
those quarterly numbers will be revised in ways that will alter our
perception of where we went wrong.
To be sure, we are trying to
forecast numbers that are consistent with the current scheme of
estimation, but there is an erratic quality in this.
One wonders
whether the fourth quarter of last year was as low and then the first
quarter as high, and so on, or whether there are some flaws in the
numbers.
We pointed out that at this point through the first three
quarters of the year--at least before today's revision--there was a
somewhat puzzling, growing discrepancy between the income and
expenditure sides of the accounts. All of these things I think you
need to recognize as the [unintelligible] pattern of errors.
But I
don't know what magic forecasting tool we missed.
I will remind folks
that in May or June you were presented with an analysis of how we had
disregarded the information from M2.
It suggested that our forecast
should have been revised down to 1-1/2 percent for the third quarter
and for the fourth quarter.
So, M2 at that point wasn't the missing
forecasting tool, at least applied the way that particular model
presented it.
I just don't know what it was.
MR. JORDAN.
Let me shift this in a slightly different
direction.
I'm still trying to understand the interaction between
what we do and how that works in your thinking about the economy in
the Greenbook exercise.
In the beginning of the Greenbook, the first
page, second paragraph gives two alternatives. The first one says the
upside surprise in the second half is confirmation that cuts in shortterm rates can still be a potent stimulative force even in the face of
various financial strains and so on. As I understand it, that's kind
of a linkage in your model. At an earlier point nominal interest
rates rose, representing a restrictive policy. And with a very long
lag inflation is coming down.
In the meantime nominal interest rates

12/22/92

also were declining, giving some positive effect on the economy.
But
at some point [in your forecast] nominal interest rates stop
declining, but [for a while] inflation continues to come down so real
So, the reason you have 1994 real [GDP
interest rates start rising.
growth] slowing with the same nominal interest rates or even slightly
higher nominal interest rates is mainly because inflation continues to
decline and real interest rates go up.
MR. PRELL. Well, let me say two things.
One is that after
having lowered the real short-term rate, even stability means that the
time profile of growth rates of GDP will show a bulge and then will
The growth rate effect
come back down as the level effect peters out.
But we've added on to that a rise in
disappears and becomes negative.
nominal short-term rates in 1994 plus the further modest deceleration
of prices, which enhances the increase in real rates. And, yes, the
rise in real interest rates in 1994 is a factor in this forecast.
MR. JORDAN. But if I read it right, isn't that the primary
factor slowing real GDP growth in 1994?
MR. TRUMAN. The other factor--I hesitate to mention it--is
the appreciation of the dollar, which is partly a function of what is
going on with U.S. real rates and partly what we assume is going on
with foreign real rates.
That's the major factor in the attenuation
of growth on the external side, the net exports side, in 1994.
The
appreciation building over a two-year period begins to have effects.
It's like a tightening in monetary policy, [resulting in] weaker
growth in the short run. The stronger dollar affects '94
predominantly.
MR. PRELL. Just to be clear on why we've done what we've
done:
Obviously, we need to make some decision about what assumption
In this case we're making some judgment
to base the forecast on.
Starting with
about where the Committee desires the economy to head.
one rather simple observation, which is that real short-term rates now
are very low and lower than we think would be consistent with some
steady state, and secondly that the other financial restraints in the
system will presumably diminish over time as capital positions of
financial intermediaries improve and so on, it seemed to us that at
some point the short-term rate should go up. We could have postponed
that until beyond 1994, but in our assessment of the trends in the
economy that ran the risk of overshooting going out into 1995--hitting
full employment and tending to head through it and thus reversing the
disinflation process. We could fine-tune this, but that is the basic
sense of what is behind the interest rate outlook.
You have been saying that the
Just to be clear:
MR. JORDAN.
modest increase in nominal interest rates you built in or the increase
in real interest rates resulting from lower inflation has its dominant
effect in '94.
MR. PRELL. Well, the reduction in inflation was less than
We notionally put in about 3/4 of a
the nominal interest rate change.
percentage point increase in the nominal federal funds rate. The
disinflation at that point is progressing at several tenths per year.
So, it's a small element in this rise in real rates.

12/22/92

MR. JORDAN. The reason I ask the question--and I don't know
how to incorporate the international effects that Ted referred to--is
that there seems to be a crosscurrent in our discussions between the
concept that the economy tends to expand in the absence of various
depressing forces that are retarding economic activity, and somehow
policy may work against those adjustment constraints, versus the view
that the economy tends to stagnate in the absence of stimulus to make
it go forward.
I'm trying to get at how, at least in the Greenbook
projections, what we are doing with respect to policy comes to bear on
the forecast.
MR. PRELL. Our notion is that, yes, there are natural
equilibration processes in the system. With adequate monetary
expansion, there are corrective mechanisms through the price system
that ultimately push the system back toward [equilibrium].
But those
take time; and it's rather hard for us to define this in terms of some
monetary path, given the uncertainties.
MR. TRUMAN. But those could be short-circuited, too.
I'll
give an example in a European context--maybe it's a far-fetched
example:
One could argue that in Germany, given what they've set in
motion, if they don't ease short-term interest rates, it essentially
would be using policy against the natural lubricating forces in the
economy. So, if policy is too tight for any extended period of time,
ultimately maybe the economy could adjust to sustained high levels of
short-term interest rates of 8 percent or 9 percent, but you'd have to
tell a very complicated story about how you got to that-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions?
like to start our Committee discussion?

If not, who would

MR. BROADDUS.
I'm happy to say, Mr. Chairman, that the
latest information on conditions in our District is quite favorable
and actually more optimistic than some of the information underlying
our report for the Beigebook.
It seems clear that economic activity
in our region is advancing at a faster pace than we had thought to be
the case earlier. There are a number of indications of this.
One
indicator that we are looking at now with respect to the District's
overall performance is the states' withholding tax collections. They
have been running ahead of projections in several different states now
through the month of October.
We don't have full data for November,
but in Virginia at least that's continuing through November.
Sectorby-sector we're getting very strong reports on Christmas sales in
every District state.
There also are signs of greater strength in
housing and manufacturing. And perhaps of more than passing interest,
we are beginning to hear at least a few slightly good things about
commercial real estate markets in our area.
Specifically, we're told
that markets for both retail space and office space are beginning to
stabilize. We have some evidence that office vacancy rates have
actually declined in a few areas in our District and rents appear to
be bottoming out, all of which strikes us as hopeful and broadly
consistent with the Greenbook projection of some improvement in
nonresidential investment in the quarters ahead.
As far as the national economy is concerned, we think the
Greenbook forecast is certainly plausible. While the growth of GDP
shown in the projections for '93 and '94 is pretty subdued and the
unemployment rate remains quite high at the end of the projection

12/22/92

period, there is a further decline in inflation.
So, all in all, the
Greenbook projection strikes us as a reasonably favorable near-term
outcome if we can get it.
We could definitely do a lot better, but we
could also do a lot worse.
We think there are risks on both sides of
the projection. We think the biggest downside risk is the possibility
that both the Japanese and European economies could turn out to be
weaker than projected. But there also are upside risks as we see it,
both externally and on the domestic side. As Ted Truman mentioned,
fiscal stimulus is already in the process of being put in place in
Japan. There is certainly a possibility that the Bank of Japan will
ease monetary policy further in the near term. There is a widespread
expectation that if conditions in Germany remain weak, we also will
see some easing by the Bundesbank at some point.
So, it seems to us
that there is at least a possibility that the external picture may be
somewhat brighter than the Greenbook projections as we move into the
second half of next year and the first part of 1994.
On the domestic side, we in Richmond sense a much more solid
and more permanent increase in aggregate demand and in both household
and business confidence now than in the other several episodes of
accelerated growth so far in this recovery. Netting it all out, we
think the overall risk in the outlook has shifted rather decidedly
toward the up side in the last several weeks, and we think it would be
appropriate for the Committee to take account of this in reaching its
policy decision this morning.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in terms of the District, the level
of economic activity continues to increase. Coming into the last
meeting, conditions were starting to show signs of improvement and, if
anything, the rate of improvement has accelerated a bit as we came
into this meeting. And I do think this improvement is fairly broadbased. Auto sales have been a little better. The first-quarter
production schedules have been set about 15 percent over last year, so
that's a good increase. The auto manufacturers are anticipating an
improvement in the sales level next year that is still below what they
describe as the baseline but it is higher than this year.
The heavy
truck business has been particularly strong.
Sales of Class 8 units
are up 15 percent this year and are forecast to be up another 16
percent next year.
The backlog now is some 12 to 16 weeks for these
units; it's pretty broad-based and is viewed as quite strong.
Steel
production continues at a good level, operating at about 80 percent
[of capacity].
Steel producers also are reasonably optimistic about
next year.
And certainly the international trade cases that are
currently going on ought to be beneficial to the industry. Between
the subsidy constraints and the dumping constraints--and I think the
latter will be announced later in January--they are expecting that
imports next year will be reduced by 4 to 5 million tons.
That should
also have the effect of improving the operating levels of the industry
by some 5 percent, and they would expect that to occur by the end of
the first quarter. This ought to provide a better environment for
pricing, which continues to be very, very rugged.
Retail sales in the District continue at a good pace, but I
must say some of the strength that we saw early in the Christmas
season has eased a bit in the last few days. This is a very tough
period to judge because the selling season is longer, but I must say

12/22/92

-11-

many of the people that I've talked to who earlier were expecting,
say, an 8 percent increase this Christmas season now are talking more
in the area of 4 to 5 percent. We have particularly strong [sales] in
communications equipment.
Orders for communications equipment
bottomed out in mid-1991 and have been increasing rapidly at annual
rates of 20 to 25 percent.
The expectation for next year is that
growth will be a little lower but still some 15 to 16 percent ahead of
1992.
Even in the agricultural equipment business, there is a little
better tone, or at least it's not worse.
One major manufacturer is
expecting a 5 percent increase in unit sales next year, but that is
after a 12 percent decline in '92 and a 9 percent decline in '91.
So,
it's an improvement from a pretty low level.
I will say, though, that
inherent to the better outlook for '93 is the expectation that an ITC
tax will be enacted, which will be beneficial to agricultural
equipment.
The inflation news continues to be very good.
To hold down
their cost of purchases, large companies are exerting tremendous
pressure on their suppliers with very good results. More than a few,
in fact, have achieved reductions in the average cost of their
purchases this year and they are expecting equally good results next
year. Competitive conditions in the marketplace make it awfully tough
to increase prices.
Labor contracts continue to be negotiated on
favorable terms, and certainly this continuing drumbeat of layoffs and
plant closings has an effect on labor expectations.
The fact that of
GM's 28 planned plant closings 12 so far have been in Michigan
certainly is unsettling to employment conditions in that state.
Turning to the national economy, while I do think the outlook
has improved--certainly we have no reason to question the staff's
forecast--I must say that I continue to have at least lingering
questions as to the underlying strength and sustainability of the
recovery. The employment numbers that will be coming out over the
next few months I think will give us pretty good indications as to how
things will work out next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, economic conditions in most states
of the Twelfth District are improving, but deterioration continues in
California.
In District states outside of California, employment grew
at an annual rate of 3-1/2 percent in October, and employment in these
states is now roughly 0.9 of a percent higher than it was a year ago.
Employment growth is consistent with anecdotal reports of strong
retail sales and renewed consumer confidence in much of the West.
However, contacts in the state of Washington report widespread concern
about the area's future due largely to Boeing's announcements of
cancellations and delays of aircraft orders and resulting layoffs.
Despite these concerns, many contacts report that current business
conditions in the state of Washington are actually quite good, and
employment in Washington actually picked up smartly in both September
and October.
In contrast, there is no sign of improvement in
California, a point that I'm sure you've read about in several
articles so far this week. Employment continued to decline in
November, bringing the decline to 155,000 jobs or 1-1/4 percent,
compared with a small rise in the national economy. Defense cutbacks
and commercial real estate problems will continue to be a drag on
southern California's economy for some time, and budget problems will

12/22/92

lead to cutbacks in levels of state and local government spending
throughout the state.
Turning to the national economy, recent economic data
It's possible that a moderate
actually have been encouraging.
expansion may finally have taken hold. Although we are not quite as
optimistic as the Greenbook concerning economic growth next year, we
have raised our forecast moderately to about 2-1/2 percent in 1993,
assuming no change in policy. Most of the pickup is likely to come
consumer durables, housing, and
from interest-sensitive sectors:
business equipment. Consistent with this moderate growth, the
unemployment rate is likely to decline only moderately over the next
couple of years and we would expect the CPI inflation to come in
Thank you.
somewhat lower than that forecast by the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to say that the
outlook for the Sixth District looks much more positive than it has
for some time, and the improvement that we're seeing seems to be
pretty much across the board. The Christmas surge in retail sales
looks quite promising; it looks to us as if the South may very well
Spending is the highest in four years
lead the nation in this area.
and is broadly based. Home furnishings and durables in particular are
generally quite strong. Retail sales are beginning to spill over into
manufacturing. Inventories were quite light at the beginning of the
season and now manufacturers and transporters are reporting unusually
Both home furnishings and
heavy activity for this late in the season.
white sales have a disproportionate representation in regional
The pickup in
manufacturing and employment [growth] as a result.
housing nationally is seen as well in the District; the building
Our
associated with Hurricane Andrew is helping the Sixth District.
That
survey of manufacturing plants was also more positive this time.
survey suggests that capital goods orders are likely to increase over
the next six months. Moreover, more than 40 percent of the
respondents expect to add workers over the next six months as compared
to about one-third last month. The anecdotal information that we're
getting from a variety of sources suggests that consumer and business
confidence has shifted noticeably since our last meeting. We've
pretty much stopped hearing negative remarks even from our small
business advisory council members, and we are now confronted by what
seem to be overly optimistic expectations--most frequently reported by
retailers.
So, I think the pendulum has swung from perhaps overly
negative to perhaps overly optimistic. The inflation news continues
to be relatively good in the District.
To be sure, there are some negatives to report, although I
In
don't think they are likely to tip the balance the other way.
particular, on the employment side, just when we thought we had seen
the end of the consolidation and cost cutting, we are now hearing of
new layoffs and cutbacks, particularly by Delta Airlines, which
Many of our state
obviously is a major employer in our District.
governments are doing better than they had been, but Louisiana and
Finally, the energy sector is
Florida still face financial pressures.
still in very poor shape, and that affects the Gulf areas
particularly. But clearly, as I said at the outset, the situation
looks much better than it did even at the last meeting, and the
outlook seems encouraging.

12/22/92

-13-

Looking at the national economy, over the entire forecast
horizon our forecast is very similar to the Greenbook although we have
Both consumer and business
growth [turning up] a little sooner.
spending on durables is higher in the Greenbook forecast than in ours.
And the Greenbook sees relatively more of these durables consisting of
imports than we do; as a result we have a less negative outlook for
net exports even though the export growth rates are fairly close.
We
have a lower unemployment rate throughout the forecast. A difference
that I've been reporting for some time is in the inflation numbers,
where our forecast for inflation remains somewhat higher and is
probably closer to the Blue Chip forecast. When I put all of this
together, it does seem to me that the expansion has greater
possibilities for being sustained this time around, and I think the
risks to the economy are more symmetrical than they have been for some
time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. The District is generally better both in tone
and activity but still is lagging the nation.
There's something about
that Mason-Dixon line which seems to make things go faster below it
and more slowly above it!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Excluding California.

MR. BOEHNE. Right. The shift in tone is more pronounced
than in activity. I agree with someone else's remark at the table
that people are more optimistic relative to activity than they were
before when in my view they were too pessimistic given the level of
activity. In terms of the sectors, manufacturing is up and retail
sales are up--I don't think as much as in the Atlanta District, but
our retailers are generally happy about the Christmas season. We hear
more comments about improvement in residential activity. And bankers
keep talking about improvement in loan demand--if not in loans booked
at least those in the pipeline.
But having said that, there still are
some clear areas of weakness. Job growth is generally quite soft in
the District.
The reports from heavy industry, notably steel, are
quite weak. I haven't really done this in any scientific way, but it
seems to me that if we have a group of small and medium-sized business
people and a group of big business people, the big business people
don't share the same kind of better feelings that the smaller business
people have. The commercial real estate market is still quite flat.
I had a group of people from that industry in and I suggested it might
take three years, perhaps five years, to get the District turned
around, and I was told that that was considerably too optimistic.
They were talking well out into the decade.
On the national scene, I think the key issue--and it has been
underscored already--is whether we now have a self-feeding moderate
recovery going.
I feel better that we do have one going at this
point.
I would put the risks at about even on the up side and the
down side. The key continues to be employment growth.
If we get some
moderate employment growth in the months ahead, then I think [the
recovery] will be self-feeding. If we do not--and I think that is
potentially the weakest link--then we could still have some
difficulty. Also, the downward pressures on inflation rates continue.
It is difficult to make price increases stick. The layoffs that are
reported in the newspapers help keep wage increases down. And I

12/22/92

suspect we may do better on the inflation front than the Greenbook
suggests.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I'd like to make three comments on the national
economy. First, just as a lesson for the future, I'd like to remind
us all that as recently as two meetings ago we couldn't see the
That isn't a
strength that was unfolding in the second half.
It wasn't in our forecast; it
criticism of the Greenbook forecast.
wasn't in other forecasts; and it wasn't in the anecdotal reports.
We
were standing right on top of it and we couldn't see it.
That's just
It's not a question in
an important lesson to remember going forward.
my mind of whether we made mistakes in the forecast.
It just points
out how difficult it is to do that and really use it as a basis for
making policy decisions.
Secondly, I realize that Mike has to make an
assumption with respect to what policy is going to be, but it's just
inconceivable to me that we'll get through 1993 without an increase in
the funds rate.
The real issue may be that we are probably lucky to
be getting out of 1992 without making one; I think it's something
we're going to have to be thinking about a lot sooner than [the
staff's] assumptions might imply.
The final point I'd like to make, and it relates to the
second one, is that it troubles me greatly when I read pieces in the
paper--I don't hear it around this table--about how we need to have
more economic stimulus, whether it's fiscal stimulus or monetary
stimulus, to increase the rate of employment growth. In my mind, the
reason that we're seeing sluggish employment growth is that we're
getting good productivity gains, and that's what one would expect at
this stage of the cycle. Those gains are going to provide the basis
for increased output and income and eventually employment down the
road.
To jeopardize this basic setting we have of declining inflation
or to jeopardize the progress that we're making toward price stability
The
in order to try to increase employment gains would be a mistake.
final observation I'd make on that particular issue is that just
because of demographics and slower labor force growth, we won't be
seeing the kind of employment gains that we've seen in other
recoveries.
That's an important factor in that.
With respect to the District, my comment would be that in
employment basically we're seeing a pickup in momentum. For a good
deal of the months during the middle part of this year, I wouldn't say
we were lagging but the pace had slowed to that in the rest of the
country.
I'm seeing increased momentum in the most recent three-month
period in relation to the last year and significantly higher gains
both in the last three months and over the last year than for the
So, we have another one of those situations where
nation as a whole.
there are very significant regional differences that are somewhat
masked in the overall numbers.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, our District continues to improve
modestly, although we would note that the anecdotal evidence is much
stronger than the statistics are showing. Our energy activity
continues to improve, especially in gas drilling. Our agricultural
area is sound, with improving livestock prices offsetting some of the

12/22/92

-15-

negatives from the lower grain prices.

But overall, our agricultural

Construction activity generally is improving a
income is still solid.
little more modestly, but the single-family housing area is very
strong, particularly in the western part of our region.
In
manufacturing, although we continue to hear about expansion plans by
Ford Motor Company in our area, that expansion has not taken place
yet.
Our manufacturing job growth is flat for the time being.
We
hear a lot of optimism from our small business groups.
They are still
saying that they would like to expand even more but are having some
difficulty getting credit from banks; that's on their minds still.
On the national front, we anticipate growth as we look out to
1994 similar to that of the Greenbook, although our path is a bit
Still, we end up about
different and a little more modest inintially.
in the same place.
We are a little less optimistic on consumer
We've revised
demand, though.
We also see improvements in inflation.
that somewhat; it's not quite as favorable as we thought earlier.
Overall, though, we think the economy is expanding at a persistent
pace going forward into 1993.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN.
I have reported for some time that the District
The
economy was expanding, and it is certainly continuing to do so.
tone of the anecdotal evidence suggests that there has been some
In fact, in some ways the anecdotes
further distinct strengthening.
sound like what one would expect early in a recovery, which of course
In some of the
is not [the case for] this expansion chronologically.
sectors, though certainly not all, people are turning ebullient; I'm
talking about housing, autos, and retail sales more generally.
Whether this is just a spike or something that is sustainable remains
to be seen.
But clearly, in the District at the moment things are
going better in terms of expansion and there is still virtually a
total lack of inflationary pressures, at least according to the
So, in most circumstances, things look
business contacts we have.
quite positive.
With regard to the national economy, I don't have any
If I were looking
problems taking the Greenbook forecast as a base.
Business
for downside risks, I would point to the foreign situation.
contacts in the Twin Cities that do any amount of business in Europe
They
or Japan have reported exceedingly negative results recently.
suggest to me that those economies are far worse than I at least had
understood them to be.
Whether that is a precursor of things to come
But clearly, they report very bad
is much more difficult to say.
conditions and, at least as far as their own businesses are concerned,
On the other
they are not optimistic [about the outlook for exports].
hand, though, putting that one risk aside, I would not be at all
surprised to see the national economy grow somewhat more rapidly than
My reading of history in the postwar period
the Greenbook suggests.
at least is that once the economy develops some momentum on the up
side--and I think that may be in the process of occurring--we tend to
be surprised both at its duration and, for a time, at its magnitude.
While the Greenbook forecast for the most part has a rather nice,
steady 2-1/2 to 3 percent growth quarter-by-quarter, if momentum is
really building here, I think for a time we will see more rapid growth
than that.

12/22/92

-16-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thanks, Mr. Chairman. Tom Melzer referred to the
regional differences. In listening to what has been said here, I am
somewhat struck by the fact that we do have quite pronounced
differences--I don't know exactly where the line is--in the north of
In terms of
California and in some other parts of the country.
activity, I would say that in the New England region nothing is very
different than at the time of the last meeting, but there is a
palpable improvement in mood and attitude.
I don't think there is
anyone who is ebullient in New England at this point, but retailers
They have seen
are considerably more optimistic about Christmas.
better activity so far and, interestingly, in the nondurables area.
There are the usual complaints about margins, with price competition
being very severe. Where the final retailing figures will come out in
our part of the country is not completely clear because retailers did
lose two days with the storm last weekend. They think they will get
most but not all of it back, but that will offset a lot of the extra
two days in the shopping season.
The employment markets remain relatively soft with hiring
being impacted by continued layoffs.
In our District that includes
IBM and of course the defense sector, which is going to [lay off
One sector where we do see some improvement
workers] for some time.
Housing
is in housing, consistent with what other people have said.
prices have stabilized and in fact some isolated markets actually show
increases.
We also think it's going to take a long time for the
commercial real estate sector to work out its problems.
Our banks say
that they are seeing some improvement in loan demand, with some growth
in loans; but that is being offset in terms of the gross figures by
paydowns from other sectors.
Like other people, our manufacturers
have expressed a great deal of concern about the exports side.
We
have a lot of people who sell things [abroad], including non-pricesensitive high-tech kinds of things, who are seeing a quite pronounced
slowdown in Europe.
Perhaps like Richmond, our tax receipts are
showing some improvement; but interestingly they are more on the sales
side than on the income-related withholding side, where we really
haven't seen improvement.
For the nation, I think there has been a definite
improvement; one can't help but be impressed by the breadth of the
I still have concerns about
sectors reflecting this improvement.
sustainability, though I have to say that is something only time will
tell, given--to use Don Kohn's phrase--the litany of structural drags
that we have.
I have a real concern about exports, which is
Overall,
particularly reflected in this work done by Johnson, et. al.
we're somewhat more optimistic on the price side and somewhat more
pessimistic on the growth side on a marginal basis than the Greenbook.
I think at this point the risks are pretty symmetrical. Things are
improving but the sustainability is not guaranteed at this stage.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The sharp improvement in tone since the last
meeting that Bob Forrestal reported for the Southeast occurred one
The District economy has remained
meeting earlier in the Southwest.
very positive during the past few weeks, but it hasn't continued to
improve. We continue to do a little better in the Southwest than the

12/22/92

country as a whole. During the past year our employment has grown a
little over a percent and a half. At the last meeting, I reported
that one of the sources of strength in our District has been Mexican
shoppers along the border area. I should mention this time that the
Mexican authorities have imposed a $50 limit on what may be brought
back duty free in cars and on foot across the bridges.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Didn't that cause something of a riot?

MR. MCTEER. There was a riot in Nuevo Laredo over that.
It's good to see people rioting because of limits on their imports
rather than consumer exports!
This has happened before at Christmas
time when the outflow of cash has been extreme, but it is causing some
very sharp cutbacks in a lot of our border towns.
Some of the Kmart
and Wal-Mart stores are showing a drop in sales of up to 30 percent
over these past few weeks because of that.
It seems that things are going well nationally with the 3.4
percent growth in the third quarter and prospects for about the same
in the fourth quarter.
The risks do seem to have balanced out on the
up and down sides.
I think policy is in a good position, and the only
thing I'm still a little concerned about is the very slow growth in
M2.
It would have been nice if we could have ended this year at least
touching the lower bounds [of the ranges] for M2 and M3.
That gives
me some concern for the future, but for right now I think we're in
good shape.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Do you have a question, Bob?

MR. PARRY. Yes, I just want to comment on something Tom
Melzer mentioned about regional disparities.
I mentioned in my report
on California the decline of about 155,000 [jobs] in the last six
months.
If we back out California from the statistics, we get almost
a completely different picture of what is happening:
We see an
employment picture in terms of nonfarm employment where the rest of
the country is up 300,000 in the last six months. That's not robust
but it is increasing.
If we back out California from the civilian
employment numbers, we get an unemployment rate of 6.8 percent, and we
would have started from the same point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
[Laughter]

Are you about to suggest something?

MR. PARRY. We are not seceding...yet! What I'm suggesting
is that a majority of people in the country are experiencing something
very significantly different from what a group of people in one state,
or maybe even half a state, are.
MR. KELLEY.

That has been going on for a long time.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. What is the difference at this stage as
you see it between northern and southern California?
MR. PARRY. There's a significant difference:
80 percent of
the loss of employment is in southern California. They have about 60
percent of the jobs.
Parts of northern California--for example, the
Silicon Valley--show some strength.
Intel has added 1600 jobs in the
last year. We now talk about the United States as being the leader in

12/22/92

d-ram chips at this point. Biotech is doing quite well. So, there
are signs of relatively robust activity in the north, although I don't
think they approach what we are seeing in the Dallas District or the
Atlanta District.
It's very concentrated. Although it's dangerous to
take an area out and set it aside, as I said, the national figures in
some respects don't give a good indication of what is happening to the
overwhelming majority of people.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
It seems apparent that the economy is stronger
than we had anticipated.
I think the question we should be asking
Now, it may be that this is a normal cyclical
ourselves is why.
surprise, but I doubt it because normally we get a monetary aggregate
like M2 growing at a fairly rapid rate in a recovery period and
normally we get some upward movement in commodity prices as recoveries
This recovery doesn't have those features and yet we have
begin.
surprising growth in the midst of a period in which pessimism was the
predominant view.
If we ask why, I think we may ask ourselves whether
we have underestimated the short-run growth stimulus of getting the
rate of inflation down. We have decreased the tax rate on capital
goods by lowering the rate of inflation, and that may have been in
We're also
place long enough now to be giving us some real lift.
seeing a labor productivity rebound which has been as strong as it has
been in a normal cyclical [stage] in which employment and output both
were growing. So, this is something that we ought to keep in mind.
The one awesome worry out there is the external situation. Will slow
growth abroad and will the penchant for protectionism through either
tariffs or subsidies or whatever cause the world's economy to be
That's still a worry even though the U.S. economy does seem
derailed?
to be well on its way to sustained expansion. Now, it seems to me
that the price level in the United States is still rising but at a
decreasing rate.
And it seems to me that the price of gold may be
Somewhere in here, if the rise in
falling at a decreasing rate.
prices levels out at 3 percent, we may be missing a wonderful
If short-run growth does respond as well as we might
opportunity.
believe to lower inflation expectations, it would be unfortunate if we
lost sight of the goal of monetary policy at the very time in which
the field is most fertile for achievement of our long-term goal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

Mr. Chairman, I have a Christmas present for the
MR. LAWARE.
Committee!
I'm going to spare the Committee my usual comprehensive
I simply
and picturesque discussion of the economy sector by sector.
want to make the point that I remain more optimistic than the staff
does about where we're going and the pace at which we're going. The
thing that puzzles me about the Greenbook projection is that the
relatively slow rate of growth in 1993 and continuing into 1994 and
the major slack reflected in the unemployment numbers would indicate a
more rapid rate of progress on the inflation front than is contained
in the Greenbook projection. My own feeling is that the growth rate
of GDP in 1993 will probably be up to 50 basis points higher [than the
Greenbook forecast] and I think that rate of growth may be consistent
with somewhat lower unemployment numbers and with the Greenbook
projection on inflation.
In summary, I feel more optimistic about the
rate of growth in the economy and the rate of decline in the
I think the risks in the
unemployment rate than the Greenbook.

12/22/92

projection are about symmetric with a slightly greater tilt toward the
upside risk.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. Well, the situation in my part of the country
brightened considerably on two occasions since the last meeting when
the sun came out very briefly. It hadn't happened since September.
It did improve the mood of the place.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Sensitive about this are you, Jerry?

MR. JORDAN.
Like some others have commented around the
table, the shift in mood is striking. People were reporting their own
situations as not so bad but we were getting this disparity between
what they saw nationally and how gloomy they were versus their strong
order books, their backlogs, their goods production, and so on.
So,
at the time of our October meeting when the downbeat mood was so
pervasive--including here--I was hearing the same thing from all the
business groups and directors and others.
That has totally vanished.
Nothing has changed in what they say about what is going on in their
own situations.
Housing is still good; retailing is good.
As Si
Keehn reported, [sales of] heavy trucks are very strong--about the
best in five years.
We assemble a lot of light vehicles--small trucks
and vans that people use as cars--in our District and they are also
very strong. The gloominess comes from the large international
corporations that have foreign operations.
The negative commentary is
very, very strong about Canada and Europe.
I don't know whether to
give more weight-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They are including Canada in that?

MR. JORDAN. Yes, they are including Canada because of labor
costs and the political situation; they're still very worried about
the cost of benefits.
One major manufacturer who has a very large
operation up there says that by far his most productive, efficient
plant in the technical sense is in Canada, but he cannot get contracts
in the United States because people do not trust having to depend on a
Canadian supplier.
Turning to the national scene, I don't know whether to give
more credence to what is now an upbeat note in the outlook than I
would have to a downbeat note three months ago.
My bias is to think
that the economy does tend to expand. As Gary Stern was saying, the
history would say that once the economy starts in an upward direction,
revisions tend to feed on themselves, as we've seen this year so far.
The numbers come in stronger than anticipated and the revisions
generally tend to be in an upward direction. I think that has
sustainability. I don't think it's symmetrical; there's a natural
bias in an upward direction. So my own national outlook would
probably be stronger than what the Greenbook says.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as far as the outlook is
concerned, our forecast is essentially the same as Mike's, so I think
that's a reasonable point of departure. The export sector probably is
the area that I would worry about most in terms of a conventional

12/22/92

-20-

assessment of the forecast.
On the anecdotal side, there are a couple
of things I want to mention briefly. First, in the case of very large
multinational corporations--and I'm not limiting this at all to IBM-it's quite clear to me from the comments I get from CEOs that this
restructuring process has not run its course.
That still has a ways
to go.
IBM may be symptomatic of that, but I'm getting that from CEOs
of other very, very big companies as well.
Second, from the anecdotal
area, there is some life in loan demand out there.
It's not pervasive
and it's not robust, but it is there.
And consistent with a number of
comments others have made about retail sales and so on, some very
large credit card issuers, bank and nonbank alike, are telling me that
Interestingly enough, even though
credit card usage really is up.
usage is up, paydowns continue and payments against usage are coming
much faster than they have in the past so that among other things the
levels of card usage debt are probably not capturing fully the rate of
card usage in the past four to six weeks.
In the commercial real estate area, I want to echo something
We still are getting anecdotal reports that
Ed Boehne said earlier.
suggest that price declines probably have bottomed out and that rental
rates and concessions are probably bottoming out.
However, I have
just heard for the first time over the past couple of weeks that some
people are adding on to the length of the work-out process.
The
reason is because they are becoming more aware of rather large pockets
of space currently under lease that have been essentially vacated as
employment levels have been reduced, in the financial sector in
particular. That means that these various statistics of vacancy rates
aren't telling the whole story. As a result of that there is a bit,
not major, of adding on--quarters as opposed to years--in terms of the
work-out process. Another thing about this burst of confidence, if
that's what it is, is that I think the election phenomenon has
something to do with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That could be the ending of the

campaign!
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's part of it, but what
has fed on that a little is that a lot of people, including red
blooded Republican businessmen and women, are very impressed by what
they seem to [observe].
The problem is that if what you get is not
what you see, that process of feeling good can reverse itself very
quickly.
So, I think one has to be a bit cautious about that. My own
sense of the risks [to the economic outlook] is a little hard to
describe because I don't think of the risks in quite conventional
terms.
I think there is something greater than a zero possibility
that all of this could turn out to be another flash in the pan. But I
don't view those risks as high, which is another way of saying that I
think there is a little more to this, barring a big disappointment on
the fiscal budgetary side, than we've seen in the past.
But
consistent with what Gary Stern and several others have said, it's not
hard for me to visualize circumstances in which growth over, say, the
next four or five quarters could be stronger than projected in the
Greenbook.
I wouldn't bet my life on that, but it isn't hard for me
to see circumstances in which that could in fact materialize,
especially if this burst of confidence is bolstered by what turns out
So, I
to be sound national policies, including budgetary policies.
have a little trouble trying to balance the risks because in one sense
I don't think they lend themselves to any kind of statistical

12/22/92

probability basis; but I certainly would not rule out the possibility
that the economy could actually turn out to be a bit stronger even
though, as I say, I do not consider the risk to be zero that it could
fall on its face again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, 1992 has been a great year and
But now that we have
it's too bad we didn't enjoy it until December!
a President that the Washington Post credited with the upward revision
of the October retail sales data and who has an expansion named after
him that started in the third quarter of the year before he took
I
office, I think we all should just hang it up and go on vacation!
wasn't going to say anything, but I'm going to anyway. As a way of
introduction, Don Kohn talked at the Christmas tree lighting ceremony
about a tax-free, regulation-free enterprise zone at the North Pole
and then introduced me as the Fed's only certified supply-sider and,
therefore, the person who should talk about it.
So, I'm going to take
that tack.
I have to agree with a lot of the comments here that (a)
quarter-to-quarter projections are hard to make and that (b) if
anything, we should be biased at the moment toward a slightly faster
But I'd like to look down the road
expansion in the quarters ahead.
just a little at what I think are some of the problems headed this
way. First, I'll pull out my supply-sider's list of longer-term
problems this economy was facing in May 1990; it is a list that I was
asked to create in my last job before the current recession began.
The three that were on that list were:
the expansion of OSHA that
occurred in the Bush Administration; the Clean Air Act; and wetlands.
Just to show how important these can be in terms of our hitting a
who comes from
brick wall, I'll relate a story from
Wisconsin. As a biased Easterner, I always think of Wisconsin as a
But he tells of
place where housing inflation should never occur.
tremendous housing inflation in Wisconsin because of a shortage of
They've had something like 12 to 15 percent
nonwet land to build on.
house price inflation up there, which means that what they are hitting
really is supply constraints. That as well as clean air are going to
be examples of our hitting supply constraints earlier than we
otherwise would.
The second area of supply shock I see comes from labor market
changes.
I think labor market legislation is made all the easier
during a period of expansion, so I think we're going to see striker
replacement legislation, an increase in the minimum wage, and even
more aggressive Civil Rights legislation, all of which are going to
Finally, I
put upward pressure quickly on costs in the labor market.
think the chances of a supply shock on the international side are
high.
I agree with the forecast that the dollar is going to rise and
that our trade deficit is going to increase, and the supply-side
result of that is increased protectionism--probably starting as a
game, but one never knows when it will get out of hand. All of these
factors suggest that, if anything, what we're going to see is an
increase in measured inflation sooner than we otherwise would expect.
But what is different about it, and what I hope we keep in mind in
1993, is that inflation induced from these factors is not a monetary
It is a one-time increase in costs that will ultimately
phenomenon.
So, my wish for 1993 is that
be played out in the form of lower GDP.

12/22/92

the staff forecast is right; but my fear for 1993 is that, if
anything, we're going to see more inflation sooner than we'd like, and
I'm afraid we're not going to react properly to it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. That's the first sour note of the morning,
really. The main thrust of what we've been hearing this morning from
the Districts is highly encouraging, though certainly not totally
ebullient and appropriately so.
I would suggest that perhaps the
character of the progress the economy is making here is not really
changing that much; we may be seeing basically more of the stop/start
kind of pattern that we have seen in the past, hopefully at a somewhat
higher level but of the same general character.
That would imply that
there will be downside news along with the upside news.
It would
certainly appear that we're building upside momentum here, and that's
great. But it continues to struggle against these drags that we've
had for a long time and that certainly haven't gone away:
the
downsizing in defense, the real estate situation, the deleveraging,
and the restructuring. We know that litany. It seems to me that we
may be seeing the upside momentum struggling against these drags and
slowly gaining the upper hand, but perhaps that episode isn't over
yet.
Where does all of this net out?
Well, one senses that the risks
appear to be tilting in the upside direction, but it's probably too
soon to be very sure of that; maybe they should be characterized as
symmetric.
I took very much to mind Tom Melzer's remarks earlier of
where we were two meetings ago and what happened immediately
thereafter.
I think we'd all agree that gives us all plenty of reason
to be humble when it comes to making projections.
I'm struck by the
fact that so many people this morning have said that the tone of
things is leading the statistics. That's probably to be expected; on
the other hand, it's not to be trusted either. So, we undoubtedly
have challenging times ahead and difficult choices out there.
Maybe
they will come sooner than we think. They're probably going to be on
the up side, but it's too soon to be totally confident of that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Well, I don't have much to add.
Larry that we've had a great year; we didn't know it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I agree with

We didn't appreciate it.

MR. MULLINS. We didn't appreciate it.
We only learned about
it in the last week or two, but we should take the next week off and
celebrate.
I agree with Governor Angell that we should think about
why we had such a good year.
It's certainly not money growth; the
economy has been growing on velocity increases, whatever that is.
And
it's certainly not employment growth either; the economy has been
growing on productivity increases.
So, as best I can figure out, the
economy has been running on fumes so far in '92.
I don't think the
numbers have changed much from what we expected earlier in the year
even with the ups and downs.
So far growth for the year is only 2.6
percent, which is pretty good; and we probably will do a little better
than that.
I suppose one of the motivating factors could be the
election psychology. One would hope that it would turn out better
here than it did in the United Kingdom and other places where they've
had that phenomenon. I suppose there is the upside risk that Jerry

12/22/92

-23-

mentioned of sound budgetary policies at the federal level.
I guess I
have a lot of confidence that that's not too great a risk.
[Laughter]
We do seem to be lifting ourselves gradually out of the mire.
I see
nothing robust even in these latest numbers and no real signs yet that
we may be approaching an overly robust upturn. The risk is that,
despite the slack the staff talks about, we don't have nearly so much
slack as after the last recession when unemployment was 10 percent and
capacity utilization was probably 70 percent. In terms of
sustainability, I'll feel a lot more comfortable when we do get
employment growth; also, some money and credit growth would be nice.
We probably have had some marginal tightening from the dollar and from
the increase in short- and intermediate-rates as near-term
I also think the reduction in
inflationary expectations have fallen.
long rates could well be reversed very quickly once we see the
character of Congress's pent-up demand for spending as this process
gets started.
To me one of the interesting things we're going to have
to face is the coming collapse of M2 growth again. In February, the
next time we meet, we could well have had two months of zero M2 growth
and once again be back in that debate over what sort of policy we're
following at the time we decide on next year's ranges.
I would just
conclude by saying that we should take the rest of the week off and
celebrate a job well accomplished!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. The reports that we've heard today and the
reports in the last week or so are certainly the strongest evidence
since I've been on the Board that the economy appears to be breaking
out of this pattern of fits and starts that have characterized this
recovery.
Still, the persistence of regional differences remains a
concern.
I think the signs that are perhaps the most encouraging
coming out of this plethora of news include the steady improvement on
the employment front and in consumer confidence. Maybe it's the fact
that we've now had six quarters of positive GDP that is finally
dawning on people. Or maybe, as some have suggested, it's the postelection phenomenon. Or maybe people are just plain tired of being
down in the dumps and generally depressed. We're making good progress
on housing; industrial production seems to be on track after a bit of
a swoon in the early part of the third quarter. We're seeing some
small improvement, some strengthening, on the credit side.
It seems
very tenuous considering the situation that we've seen on business
bank borrowing in December but still there's some improvement there.
We have stronger corporate profits. The stock market has been holding
up.
The Dow hasn't moved a lot over the year; other indexes have
improved.
But overall, given the rather high PE ratios that we're
still seeing, the fact that the stock market has held in there as long
The flattening of the yield curve is a
as it has is a good sign.
generally good sign. I hope that is sustained and that it continues
Generally, the financial sector seems to
to flatten on the long end.
be in better shape now to support a recovery than we've seen.
I'm glad to see that some of our discussion here today has
centered on inflation. There are differing views as to whether or not
we're starting to see a buildup of concerns with respect to inflation.
And I was glad to see the extensive analysis in the Greenbook on
inflation. Concentrating on a variety of indicators--looking at the
PPI components, commodity prices, and the wage indexes as opposed to
just the CPI--I thought was helpful.

12/22/92

-24

Like others, I have some gnawing concerns as we go into 1993.
The trade balance has been mentioned.
I wonder if it's not just the
concern about what Europe and Japan as trading partners may portend
for the United States; if they get into bigger problems than might now
be anticipated, I wonder if there will be some spillover effects that
might come to our economy. On the employment side we still have a
ways to go on operating restructuring and defense restructuring, so
employment still seems to be a key to sustainability.
I think the
financial deleveraging has lessened, as [have] the Chairman's
headwinds, but I'm not sure that we know how much further we have to
go yet with respect to financial deleveraging. As a final note, I
must say that I am concerned about the monetary aggregates.
We're
going to have to look very carefully at the M2 deceleration that we're
seeing currently in December and that is projected for the next couple
of months.
I think the monetary aggregates bear careful watching.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have coffee out there or will have
momentarily, if it's not there already.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have just learned that the NBER has
ruled that the current recovery began in March 1991.
SPEAKER(?).

It's not a really timely call.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Kohn, you're welcome to try!
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

If you think you can match that, Mr.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Statement--see

Questions for Don?

MR. JORDAN.
This question of when the time is going to come
to change the [funds] rate--especially in an upward direction--and the
criteria for doing so has been on my mind a lot, and I'm sure it has
been in everybody's thinking. This is my seventh meeting, and I
thought it was time to go back and review the last year and to look at
what actually has happened in terms of all kinds of economic
indicators--monetary as well as economic indicators, nominal and real
indicators--and Committee actions to see if I could deduce an implicit
model.
I read the newsletters, as I'm sure everybody does; and
[unintelligible] and I don't see it in the numbers, it's certainly not
inflation.
It's not the various money measures:
Ml, M2, the base, or
I put together a
bank reserves. I don't even think it's real GDP.
table--a big matrix of every forecast for as many quarters out as the
Greenbook does it--for every meeting for the last year. What struck
me was that it looked as if we were on a de facto nominal GNP target.
When nominal GNP is at or above expectations, the funds rate is held
stable; but when nominal GNP comes in below what has been expected, we
cut the funds rate.
Do you want to comment?
MR. KOHN. You can interpret some of what the Committee does
I think it's a difficult question. The
to a certain extent that way.
It's
Committee does not have a nominal GDP target that it announces.
difficult partly for political reasons:
The Committee has no
authority to announce a nominal GDP target; and to the extent that it

-25-

12/22/92

would imply something about real output and unemployment rates, that
could get you into some hot water [depending on] how people interpret
it.
A nominal GDP target has a lot of attractive aspects, I think.
You have to think about how to react to unexpected developments or
shocks.
It implies equal reaction to shortfalls in inflation and
output, and you might not want to do that; it might be very dependent
on where you are in the business cycle.
But there are a number of
caveats, if you think about it.
And even a nominal GDP target is
implicitly still a forecasting exercise.
It really involves trying to
figure out where the economy is going to be any number of quarters
ahead of time.
So, I don't think that gets around the problems you
and President Melzer raised earlier about having to rely inevitably to
a certain extent on your forecast of the economy. I don't think
there's any way around that.
MR. JORDAN. Well, I've read the things that academicians
have had to say about nominal income targeting.
Despite some sort of
theoretical appeal to some people, in this context I would be
concerned that what could cause nominal GNP to grow significantly
faster than currently expected in 1993 would be real output. There's
very little likelihood that it's going to come from the price side.
So, to have a de facto nominal GNP target would put the Committee in
the position of being characterized as anti-growth, if it's perceived
that we're tightening because of faster real growth.
MR. KOHN. Well, I think that's the same thing I was trying
to say before about how the Committee reacts.
If you do tighten
because real growth is much higher next year, I think it would be
because your projection was that this was moving the economy closer to
potential and there would be a danger of short-circuiting the downward
trend of inflation or even accelerating inflation the following year.
So, it wouldn't be explainable necessarily just on the nominal GDP
terms; it would be looking forward regarding what that implies about
inflation.
MR. JORDAN. But then you have to have a theory or model
about what causes inflation that's coherent or else you're going to
run into some trouble.
MR. PRELL.
I'd like to establish that in the past the
Federal Reserve has shied away from enunciating a view about potential
GDP growth, remaining agnostic and being prepared presumably to
accommodate any positive surprise.
If the positive surprise on
nominal GDP could be discerned to be a favorable supply shock, then
accommodating it would be a more natural thing to do than if you felt
it was a demand shock which tightened up markets and had inflationary
consequences down the road. But viewing nominal GDP targeting as your
basic approach takes some things as given, as being relatively stable.
You may view this [approach] as a way of having an automatic
stabilizer over time so that it would be natural to react if you're
overshooting, with the thought that you would end up with some price
pressures later [if you don't react].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. If I could pursue what Don said, and maybe the
General Counsel would like to comment:
Are we precluded from
announcing a nominal GDP target?

12/22/92

-26-

MR. KOHN.
Well, I don't see anything in the Humphrey-Hawkins
Act that would preclude us from announcing whatever target we wanted
to as long as we still have money and credit targets.
MR. MATTINGLY.

Right.

MR. LINDSEY. Oh, I see. Your view is that we're not
mandated by law as opposed to not allowed by the law.
MR. KOHN.

Sure.

MR. LINDSEY.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Jerry, in the discussion about nominal income
targeting it's clear to me that there are some problems associated
with it.
But what is perhaps more relevant is whether the problems
associated with nominal income targeting are greater or lesser than
those associated with interest rate targeting.
I'm afraid a lot of
the academic literature would suggest that we probably would reduce
the chance of making the kinds of mistakes that we make with interest
rate targeting if we followed a nominal income target.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We could actually [target] nominal GDP,
but we'd come out awfully [unintelligible] on the policy side.
The
problem I have with that [and a reason we're] not doing it is the
forecast, which doesn't readily address itself to this automatically.
Look, the whole purpose of money targeting is that it is a proxy for
nominal GDP.
If we can do it directly, do we need the proxy?
SPEAKER(?).

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Well, nominal GDP targeting is really not as bad
as it might seem in that it does have a heavy price level direction to
it.
That is, the advantage of using nominal GDP as a target versus
using real GDP is that we are saying to other policymakers that if
they in some sense gear up activities that tend to cause wage rate
pressures or other price pressures to take place, then they are voting
for lower real GDP.
So, nominal GDP targeting is not that far away
from what I think is price level targeting.
I think price level
targeting is better, but we'll see.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

He views it as real and you view it as

price.
MR. KOHN.
But in the case of a supply shock, a lot of people
have advocated nominal GDP targeting. We discussed this actually in
August of 1990 in the face of supply shocks.
It is supportive, as
Governor Angell said, because it has some of these automatic
stabilizer-type properties that Mike was talking about; you can't
overshoot too badly on one side or another and you bring about
corrective actions, particularly when you're unsure with prices going
one way and quantities going the other way.

-27-

12/22/92

MR. ANGELL. Take the supply-side shock we had in 1973.
That
supply-side shock with nominal GDP targeting would have produced about
the same kind of monetary restraint we would have had if we'd pursued
a price level target. A very severe monetary restraint would have
been induced by that kind of supply-side shock.
MR. PARRY. It depends on how flexible our policy rule is, I
We can take into
suspect.
It doesn't have to be [inflexible].
account special effects. There are supply-side shocks that we may
want to accommodate and some that we don't.
MR. ANGELL. Yes, but the problem is that the FOMC in the
1970s did too much of that.
MR. LINDSEY. The advantage of nominal GDP targeting,
especially if we allow a range, is that we're not driven to guessing
whether this is a positive supply shock or a negative one.
Jerry, I'm
a little surprised by your negative comments on nominal GDP targeting.
That is the problem.
It's
MR. JORDAN. Compared to what?
not that I would prefer interest rate targeting. I'm mainly concerned
in this environment that the thing that would cause this Committee to
raise the funds rate would be real GNP growing faster, being reflected
in faster nominal GNP in the current environment.
MR. LINDSEY. Let's say, for instance, that we had nominal
GDP growth over 6-1/2 percent.
What would be your policy prescription
for such a result?
MR. JORDAN. Mine wouldn't be anything.
what the money supply was doing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'd want to look at

Which money supply?

MR. JORDAN. The monetary base. But I would be concerned
about the Committee reacting to that factor--nominal GDP caused by
faster real growth--as though we needed to maintain slack in the
economy to bring downward pressure on prices.
I still would prefer
ultimately a price level check, but we can't control the prices
directly by anything that we do.
MR. ANGELL. If you had chosen the monetary base, your voting
record would have been more conservative than Tom Melzer's!
MR. JORDAN.

I think I can reconcile--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions? Let me start off
by first identifying what I consider to be a more buoyant outlook
[among the participants] in this meeting than I frankly had expected.
It's clearly more buoyant than the Beigebook, which is the closest
thing we have to a region-by-region look. And especially, as Bob
Parry points out, if we expunge southern California, things are really
moving at a surprising pace.
I do think, however, that we have to be
a little careful about these volatile moves, and that applies in both
directions.
Tom Melzer noted that we were unduly pessimistic last
I would point out, however, that policy didn't change as a
October.
consequence of that--that the [policy] mechanism does not capture
these swings and I hope it will not.
As a consequence, I don't think

12/22/92

we are about to jump on board the most recent swings until we
understand what the process is.
One of the more interesting aspects
of what is going on at the moment--it's something that a number have
alluded to--is that we basically have a productivity-driven recovery,
or more exactly arithmetically the gross domestic product increase is
largely attributable to the rise in productivity and to a marginal
extent to the rise in average hours worked. The outlook for that
particular variable is really quite critical to a number of the issues
There is an interesting
that have been raised around this table.
question as to whether, in fact, we can have continued strong growth
without employment growth. Obviously, theoretically we can.
The
question really gets to the issue of whether or not this productivity
surge we've been looking at is abnormal or not.
It is quite
unprecedented in the context of how little economic growth we have had
since March 1991.
There are essentially two hypotheses about what those
increases are attributable to, both of which could turn out to be
right. The first is that the level of output per work hour at the
bottom of the recession was quite low relative to the inputs of both
physical capital and human capital.
In a sense that's saying that the
economy was not operating at an efficient level relative to its
inputs.
In that case, by just tightening up one can very readily
reduce labor input and create within a certain range a rise in output
per work hour.
One presumes that that can continue to increase until
we run up to the upper edge of that range, meaning that the existing
capital, both physical and human, is being employed at its most
efficient levels.
The second possibility here is that the norm of long-term
productivity growth, which is implicit in this concept of a range, has
tilted upward.
In that case, we're not looking at 1 percent or
slightly more than 1 percent [as the norm], but conceivably all of a
sudden something has occurred which has changed the longer-term
productivity growth [trend].
Some anecdotal evidence suggests that
there is at least something to that.
Jerry [Corrigan], I don't know
if you remember that breakfast where we had a very interesting
representation of manufacturing corporations who were raising the
point that this restructuring that is going on had only really begun,
which is the same issue that you were getting from the New York
[business leaders].
It strikes me that what may be happening--and I
say "may"--is that we have looked for years and years for the
significant impact of productivity growth coming off the major
computer input in telecommunications and high-tech capital assets and,
as you may recall, we got very little of it.
I think the reason is
that we did not have the software. Essentially we could not really
employ that degree of computational power without a major upswing in
the analytic capabilities in using the equipment.
In the last five or
six years, or maybe a little longer, there has been a very dramatic
increase in applicable software.
One need only look at the stock
market price of Microsoft to see the market valuation of this
particular asset coming on stream. The people Jerry and I were
talking to at the breakfast were talking about [unintelligible]
systems manufacturing. I remember one of the people there was an old
friend of mine from a company called
which used to
put DC motors into the rolling mills of a lot of the steel operations;
that was their market.
So, I raised the question:
Is the big steel
business now basically heavily DC motors?
And he said "We don't even

12/22/92

-29-

What we think of is complete computer
think that way anymore.
If you go around and speak to
operating systems of manufacturing."
people, what you find is that in the last two or three years there has
been a major change in the way manufactured goods are created. And if
you look at the data in the nonmanufacturing area, we are finally
beginning to see some definite quickening in output per work hour in
that area as well.
So, what we may well be looking at, and what the
restructuring is essentially all about, is the stripping out of big
Companies are literally taking divisions and
segments of employment.
just wiping them out. A lot of that is directly applicable to the
information systems that are created by the telecommunicationscomputer matrix. That is, a very large part of overhead has been
communications overhead, meaning in the extreme form [a situation]
But the
where everyone just writes memoranda to each other.
communications managerial systems have improved very dramatically to
the point where people have been washed out of the system at a very
rapid rate.
If this is the beginning of something of quite important
significance, the question is whether it is in fact saying that our
potential GDP is being underestimated.
Something may be going on
here.
The trouble is that we will not be able to know that for a
while.
It is quite conceivable that part of the problem that we're
looking at is that the marginal cost of adding new people is so great
at this stage that it may be creating somewhat of an illusion about
the relationship between capital and labor; it may be creating an
attitude on the part of a number of managers that they just will not
hire new people except under duress because the obvious medical costs,
employment training, and all the other costs are very large. And the
big upswing in the temporary employment rolls is really quite
impressive and clearly out of line with what the previous history of
temporary employment has been.
So, we may have a technical problem here which is obscuring
what is going on and may be making it appear to be a much bigger issue
than it is.
But what is certainly the case, if the Greenbook GDP
figures are right or if those figures are any stronger than that, is
that we are going to get one of two scenarios. One is that we will
get a very marked increase in actual employment growth, because it's
difficult to imagine the average workweek going very much higher than
it is.
And if we are at the upper ranges of productivity growth, then
the arithmetic of the system basically says that it all falls out to
increased employment. The alternate scenario is that we are badly
missing a major secular change in the productivity trend, in which
It's not clear
case this is going to work out somewhat differently.
to me how it will play out in the sense that we do know that without a
significant increase in employment, we will run into problems with how
to get consumption continuing to [increase], especially when the
saving rate is as low as it is.
And this is a low saving rate despite
the fact that we still have significant debt repayment going on. The
debt pressures are clearly still there.
I suspect the outlook, therefore, is a bit uncertain because
of secular changes that are occurring, and I'm a little hesitant at
this point to argue that we have a clear view as to how it will come
out.
I'm not saying, incidentally, that there are negative elements

12/22/92

-30-

in this.
There is, however, as pointed out by a number of you and in
the excellent memo that the International Division put out, a very
clear indication that the rest of the world is in really sad shape.
We don't need the published data from foreign statistical agencies to
tell us what is going on.
As a number of you have mentioned, in terms
of the general view of the multinational corporations, sometime a
couple of months ago the order series for the foreign affiliates of
U.S. corporate manufacturers all of a sudden just went "bang."
There
was a hole and Germany apparently just fell off the cliff. That's
true in a lot of discussions.
I was a little surprised at the
Canadian [situation], but presumably that's not all that much
different.
But there is a potentially fairly significant drag coming
from the international side, which affects this [outlook] as well.
On the positive side, however, there are two elements that
suggest there is considerable support remaining in this buoyancy that
we're seeing. The first, which hasn't really been mentioned except by
Mike in the Greenbook, is that inventory/sales ratios are really quite
low. And if the economy starts to move faster than is generally
expected, then lead times on production, orders, and deliveries will
start to move out and the desired levels of inventories in the system
will begin to move up. We could see even with all the computer-based
controls and everything else like that, a bigger inventory
accumulation than is forecast in the Greenbook. There's nothing like
inventory accumulation to feed through to profit margins, which feeds
through to capital investment, and it would be very easy to turn the
Greenbook forecast into a lower estimate. The problem I have with
that is the low saving rate.
Mike wrote somewhere that we have a low
saving rate pending the next revision of the national income accounts
on what the history is all about. That may be a very prescient
insight.
We do know that as existing home sales begin to move up, as
indeed they have, we are creating realized capital gains on the sales
of homes which in turn are substantially financed by net increases in
mortgage debt on existing homes.
[The result is] cash to the sellers
of homes which is unencumbered cash and is not all that
distinguishable from disposable income. That means, in effect, that
there is more income and more household savings--or at least it's
perceived as savings--on the part of the household community.
They
basically look not only at the existing stock of wealth and how it's
changing but also, as is obvious from the data, how it is markedly
affected by the actual capital gains cash flow which occurs as the
turnover of houses increases.
All in all, the evidence we're looking at clearly has taken
on a better tone and potentially a very significantly better tone for
the longer run if productivity and potentially [favorable factors]
that may be emerging are real and not just going to boomerang. On the
other hand, I do think we have to be careful about being overly
buoyant because it's very difficult with the extraordinary
globalization of the world's economies to believe that the United
States can move in any vibrant manner independently of what is going
on in the rest of the world.
So, we have concerns, mainly with regard
to the rest of the world. We don't have any real insights into what
could happen in the event there is a major political turnaround in
Russia or the Ukraine or elsewhere. These are orders of magnitude, if
they occur, that would have extraordinary impacts for one on our
defense budget. Think of what would happen to defense appropriations
if all of a sudden there were a totalitarian swing in Russia.
The

12/22/92

turnaround [in defense spending] could be quite remarkable and,
needless to say, would have a very important effect on economic
activity.
In closing, I merely want to say, listening to the discussion
around this table, that we clearly have moved away from asymmetry
toward ease and have moved somewhat in the other direction. How far
we go or what is the longer-term future for policy will unfold over
time.
But I must say that I am encouraged by what I have heard around
this table so far.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, in terms of policy direction, I
prefer "B" symmetrical, and let me mention why. While we study [the
economy] an awful lot, I don't think that excludes us from a natural
human tendency to have expectations and sentiments that swing too far
in one direction or the other. I don't think we're exempt from that
I'm encouraged that the [economic outlook] is
general tendency.
better, but I think it's far from certain for a number of the reasons
you have mentioned.
I'm inclined to think the potential is greater
But the timing of changes in potential as these
than we have assumed.
released workers, if you want to call them that, become more fungible
and can be absorbed in a different capacity back into the work force
I just don't see in the
is very, very uncertain and hard to judge.
global situation that we will have price pressures in the immediate
future.
I'm not saying that won't happen before long--obviously we
have to be diligent about [monitoring] that--but I don't think there
is a strong concern about that at this time. Also we have this very
difficult situation of the very slow rate of growth of M2, with M2
being what we do report to the Congress regardless of my skepticism
about it, and the fact that you are going to have to go up [to
So, coming from where we've been in an
Congress and testify].
asymmetric stand toward ease, I think it would be premature at this
time not to have at least a way station for some time in terms of
symmetry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY.
Mr. Chairman, recent developments suggest that a
moderate expansion is underway, and we are seeing numbers in the
inflation area that certainly are encouraging. That would lead me to
recommend alternative B.
Also, since the economy is picking up, I
believe we probably should give somewhat less weight to the risk of
stagnant real economic activity and more weight to the possibility
that it may accelerate more sharply, and that would lead me to a
So, I would favor "B" symmetric.
symmetric directive at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Jordan.

MR. JORDAN. A couple of comments and thoughts about the
I think these fundamental structural
first part of your remarks:
I am concerned about
technological things are very, very major.
whether the national income accounts conceptually are appropriate for
capturing [what is occurring].
Even the definition of what is output
is going to have to be rethought at some point as is how we measure
and assess productivity. One of the fastest growing employers in my
District is in Lexington, Kentucky. They've doubled their work force
--it's not a big number--from 30 people to 60 people in a year; it is
moving along pretty well. The Lexington area has 4 percent

12/22/92

unemployment. The problem is finding people who have the skills they
want, so they [attract] them in from southern California or somewhere.
I don't think that sort of thing shows up very well in the way we put
these numbers together.
During the Little Rock Summit, Governor Clinton raised the
question of whether it would be desirable policy to have as a goal
trying to move manufacturing employment from where it currently is at
16-17 percent [of the workforce] up to 20 percent because our major
trade [partners] often have 30 percent.
I think an issue that is
going to have to be addressed at some point is what is manufacturing
employment. These companies don't want to hire people to get their
hands dirty. They want to buy the software from somebody else.
So, a
lot of economists think public policy is going to have to address
those kinds of issues.
Turning to monetary policy, I want to comment on this issue
of money and economic activity and my view of it.
Both Governors
Angell and Mullins in their remarks said that the growth [in GDP] is
not a result of--Wayne said M2 and Dave said money--and I'm not sure
that that's at all true.
I can interpret what has happened this year
as the lagged effects of the very slow growth we have had in M2 for
some time, which has brought down inflation. Wayne talked about the
stimulative effect of lower inflation, but what caused low inflation?
I think it's the lagged effects of the much slower growth of M2.
And
at the same time we have had very rapid growth in the narrow
aggregates. M2 has never been a good indicator of turning points in
economic activity; it has never been a predictor of real output or
even that good a predictor of nominal GNP.
It is an indicator over a
three-to-five year horizon of basic inflationary pressures.
I still
think there's validity in the P* model.
My emphasis on M2 has been
two-fold:
One is the idea that the long-term objective for the
monetary policy part of total financial economic policy is to move to
price stability, and that means we emphasize M2; the second is that M2
is what this Committee has been going to the Hill and announcing as
our target, worrying about the credibility of the Committee if we
announce the target and then don't take action to try to hit it.
But in terms of shorter-term effects on real output or
especially on total spending, nominal GDP, I have always thought the
narrow measures, M1 or the monetary base, are a better gauge of the
thrust of our actions.
I tend to accept the view that monetary policy
as reflected in the narrow measures of money has been countering more
of the headwinds or process of down drafting or it would have been
much worse. Monetary policy in fact has been very stimulative, and
the critical thing would be to back off from that kind of short-run
stimulus in the narrow measures before we do see the future inflation.
I think we can reconcile what has happened to our narrow and broad
measures just as the Germans have with the opposite situation. They
have had extraordinarily slow growth of Ml, until very recently, and
very rapid growth of M2 with high inflation. For them, M3 goes along
with high inflation.
The slow growth of Ml and the inverted yield
curve and all of that go along with no output growth.
So, I think
these disparities can be put back together.
Currently--being this
close to the end of the year and not knowing how we're going to rebase
the targets for 1993--I wouldn't have a basis for dissenting on the
grounds of trying to hit an M2 target. There's nothing that we could
do now that would have any effect on that.
So, in the current

12/22/92

situation I would simply support alternative B symmetric really by
default--not knowing what else to do.

Syron's
holding
you are
That is

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me respond, incidentally, to Dick
body language, which may have occurred because I've been
back so far from making a recommendation. Basically I think
The answer is:
inferring that I would go beyond symmetric.
not my view at all.
MR. SYRON.

No, I didn't think you would.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

"B" symmetric.

President Boehne.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. I think "B" symmetric is the appropriate
policy for the moment. But as we sit in the middle of that directive,
I think we have to be very careful to look at both sides of the
equation as it were and not give in to the euphoria that I sense is
out there among people. On the other hand, we also need to be very
vigilant about the price situation and be prepared to move in the
That, it seems to me, is
other direction if that becomes necessary.
But "B" symmetric is fine
the challenge that faces us at the moment.
with me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the meetings in the future.
MR. SYRON.

The challenge is not now;

it's ahead in

That's right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I strongly support "B" symmetric.
I have no appetite for asymmetry toward tightness at this point,
But
first, because I think there still are some weak spots out there.
more importantly, I see no signs that in this intermeeting period we
I just don't see that
are likely to need a tightening immediately.
need right now. Also, I have the feeling that if we do need to
tighten, 25 basis points is probably not going to be enough; that is,
when we hit the point where we need to tighten, we may need to go 200
[Laughter]
That would help the
basis points in one nice move.
markets get out of this habit that they get into every time we have
this kind of circumstance and we move 25 basis points and then 50
Well, this is the first of a series
basis points and the markets say:
It seems to me that we
and the bond market really takes a big hit.
can't be so lucky that a 3 percent fed funds rate is just exactly
right, but I see nothing now that would cause me to believe that a
move is imminent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

12/22/92

MR. HOENIG.
Mr. Chairman, I agree with "B" symmetric.
I
feel that the economy is in a continued modest expansion [phase].
But
there are some underlying [concerns] that you and others have
identified, including where we are in the employment picture, the
deficit picture, and the spending picture.
So, I think we would be
well advised to stick with "B" symmetric at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'd be in favor of "B" symmetric.
It does seem to me that there has been a shift both in fundamentals
and attitudes.
But I have a lingering question about the
sustainability of that shift,
so I think "B" symmetric is appropriate
at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

President Stern.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I'm wondering how I can outdo Wayne here!
I
would favor "B" biased toward tightening, but I could accept "B"
symmetric. And just for the video cameras, I once dissented in favor
of an easier policy in 1989!
Alan, just to pick up on what you were saying, if you're
right about this productivity phenomenon--and I know you weren't
asserting this
but just
laid it out as an explanation--and we in
effect have greater potential than we realize but temporarily we also
have associated debt and more unemployment, this goes back to what I
was saying before:
I really don't think it's the job of monetary
policy to hurry the adjustment [process] along, and I don't think you
were suggesting that.
The economy is going to have to absorb that,
and we've got to focus on price stability. As I think Don said at the
end of his statement, we can't use a pickup in inflation as our signal
that we need to begin to tighten policy.
I've heard that suggested,
but if we wait until then I think all of us know that we're going to
be way too late--probably by not just a matter of months but by years.
The other thing I would say is that [when we were easing
policy] we said that we would very likely overshoot in terms of trying
to stimulate the economy and get the funds rate too low, but that once
things turned around--and I know this turnaround has been long in
coming and there is still
uncertainty about it--we would have to be
prepared to pull that rope back fairly quickly. I think we're
approaching that point.
That's what I have to say.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Governor Kelley.

Governor LaWare.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

12/22/92

MR.MCTEER.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President-elect Broaddus.

We favor "B," and we have a strong preference
MR. BROADDUS.
for a symmetric directive, Mr. Chairman. We think it would be a
mistake not to move to symmetry now because that might send a message
to those who look at these things that we're not going to be vigilant
going forward if we run into unexpected strength in the economy. So,
we would strongly support symmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, if my colleague wants to change
200 basis points to get us out of the habit of being at 3 percent, I'm
afraid the Dow is going to get out of the habit of being at 3000, too.
But "B" symmetric is clearly the right move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. PHILLIPS.

Governor Phillips.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I support "B" symmetric and look forward to the
Humphrey-Hawkins testimony when this becomes public at a time when we
have had two months of zero M2 growth and are lowering our ranges!
But I think, clearly, it's "B" symmetric. We seem to be ascending
toward an orderly growth path. It's not at all inconceivable to me
that the current rate environment is unsustainable. If we do have a
period of disinflation, bringing inflation expectations down and real
rates up, I think it's more likely that we will need adjustments. And
obviously, if European rates come down, the dollar is likely to go up.
The ultimate target here is a [sustainable] rate environment. In my
view we ought to think about getting ahead of that with some modest
adjustment if we see signs of trouble rather than risk waiting, in
which case I think we really might need what my colleague, Mr. Angell,
has suggested.
So, "B" symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wayne, I must admit that you got
I think we have a fairly uniform position in
everybody's attention!
this institution and I would ask the Secretary to read a "B" symmetric
directive.
"In the implementation of policy for the
MR. BERNARD.
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
In the context of the Committee's
of pressure on reserve positions.
long-run objectives for price stability and sustainable economic
growth, and giving careful consideration to economic, financial, and
monetary developments, slightly greater reserve restraint or slightly
lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with M2 growing at a rate of around 1-1/2 percent and M3
about unchanged in the period from November through March."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

12/22/92

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Hoenig
President Jordan
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
President Melzer
Governor Mullins
Governor Phillips
President Syron

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Our next meeting is scheduled for
Tuesday-Wednesday, February 2-3.
END OF MEETING

