Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
March 11,

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

1992

Greenspan, Chairman
Angell
Hoenig
Jordan
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Melzer
Mullins
Phillips
Syron

Messrs. Boehne (Board), McTeer, Keehn, and Stern,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Atlanta, and San Francisco, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. McDonough, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Oltman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call of
March 11, 1992
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning. The reason for this
conference call is that the interval between our regular meetings is
exceptionally long in this intermeeting period, and I thought it might
not be a bad idea for us to have a quick review of what is going on.
We'll have shortened reports from staff and hopefully go around the
table to get some judgment as to what each of you sees within the
First, I'd like
individual Districts and in the economy as a whole.
to welcome Jerry Jordan, who I gather is one-day old as a [Reserve
Bank] president.
Jerry, are you there?
MR. JORDAN.

I'm here.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. JORDAN.

Good morning.

Good morning and welcome.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. To start off I'd like to call on Bill
McDonough to bring us up to date on what has been going on in the
exchange markets since the last meeting.
MR. MCDONOUGH. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the time of the
last meeting the dollar appeared to be in a trading range of around
1.6 deutschemarks and 125 yen. But we mentioned the definite
possibility of considerable volatility and larger moves than economic
That view of the dollar and the
fundamentals appeared to justify.
market has turned out to be quite close to what has happened. The
dollar was quite strong early in the period, mainly as a reflection of
a weak yen and mark. But in the last several weeks the dollar has
been strong in its own right as foreign exchange market participants
have accepted all bullish data at face value and ignored bearish
signals.
This morning the DM reached [1.6730], a depreciation against
the dollar of just over 4-1/2 percent since our last meeting. The
exchange rate mechanism within the European Monetary System has been
characterized by some strengthening in the narrow band of currencies
against the deutschemark and a continuing weakness of sterling, with
the pound fully extended against the [deutschmark] within a wide band.
The sister currency, the Swiss franc, has been weak and the Swiss
and
National Bank intervened last Friday with sales of
the equivalent of
of marks. This morning the Swiss were
The weakness of the Swiss franc seems
in again and sold
to be a result of weakness in the real economy, some slippage in price
performance, and an unsuccessful attempt to have their interest rates
lower than those of Germany.
The Japanese yen is trading at 133.73; that's a depreciation
against the dollar of 7 percent since the last meeting. The Japanese
in what has
monetary authorities have sold a total of
been a rather ineffective effort to stop this trend. The U.S.
Treasury joined in the intervention when on February 17th we sold on
their behalf $100 million at 127.36 yen to the dollar. On February
20th, we intervened again by selling $50 million at 128.13 yen, with
that operation shared equally by the Federal Reserve and the Treasury.
The Japanese have continued to intervene, in fact as recently as this
in their time zone.
They did not
morning when they sold
ask the U.S. authorities to join. The Canadian dollar has also

3/11/92

weakened by about 1.6 percent since the last
meeting to $1.1950 to the
U.S. dollar.
And that's despite very heavy intervention by the
Canadians totalling about
U.S. dollars.
Undersecretary Mulford told me that at the G-7 deputies
meeting there was general agreement that the yen was weaker than
fundamentals would indicate but no agreement on doing anything.
The
Japanese
As Mulford said, and as Governor Angell and I
heard loud and clear at the BIS two days ago, the Europeans
The Germans
Their neighbors, led by the
British and the French, are
Needless to say, the British
government
So, the Japanese are
Both Governor Mieno and his international
deputy told me at the BIS meeting that

Mr. Chairman, the only intervention for the Federal Reserve
since the last
meeting was the sale of $25 million against yen that I
mentioned a moment ago.
I would be happy to answer any questions.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bill, on the extraordinary weakness of
the Swiss franc, my recollection is that the Swiss franc short-term
rates ran up very sharply against DM-denominated rates for, I believe,
30-to 90-day maturities, and yet the franc continued to weaken
relative to the DM. Now, this was in the last week or two.
How does
the market describe that?
In other words, I think there was a 75
basis point rise
in the spread without any demonstrable slowing in the
rate of decline of the Swiss franc vis-a-vis the deutschemark.
MR. MCDONOUGH. Mr. Chairman, I think what happened is that
the Swiss in January reduced their short-term rates and brought them,
if I remember correctly, about 125 basis points beneath the short-term
German rates.
The market at that time was also sluggish in its
response.
It didn't attack the Swiss franc until about the last two
weeks. And then when the Swiss reversed the interest rate movement
and sought to close the differential, the market did not respond to
that either.
So, they gambled and lost on the interest rate
differentials
and paid for it with about a seven-week lag.
Now they
don't seem to be able to stop the market from punishing them despite
the interest
rate move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Bill?

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, Bob Forrestal in Atlanta. I'm
just wondering, Bill, if there has been any substantial effect on
sterling as a result of the British election outcome this morning?

3/11/92

MR. MCDONOUGH. No, the stock market and the bond market in
the United Kingdom got hit largely because of the increase in the
borrowing requirement, which about doubled. There is a general
conviction that they will not be able to ease short-term money rates.
There's a British political tradition there. In the history of the
United Kingdom, they have on only two occasions lowered interest rates
after they called the election and before the dissolution of
Parliament, which is next Monday. And they have never reduced
interest rates between the dissolution of Parliament and the
elections.
So, it's this conviction that they probably won't lower
interest rates tomorrow or Monday or Friday that is holding sterling
pretty steady.
MR. FORRESTAL.

Thank you.

If not, let
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Bill?
me call on Peter Sternlight to update us on the Domestic Desk.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Domestic interest
rates have moved up since your meeting in early February, though with
a good bit of backing and filling in response to particular news
reports on the economy and partly related [policy] anticipations,
which at times folded in and then worked out against expectations of
further monetary policy easing. The persistent influences over the
five weeks were a nearly unrelenting sense of endless supply and more
recently a bit of growing confidence in the economy. The economy is
not seen as in a strong rebound, but there is a more widespread view
that we've probably seen the low point and can likely anticipate a
Money growth has been getting a bit more attention
moderate advance.
as the period has gone on. While fed funds rates are pretty close to
the 4 percent level, bill rates have risen about 15 to 40 basis
points.
The two-year area is up nearly 1/2 percentage point; the
five-year note is up about 30 basis points; and the long bond is down
about 10 basis points, putting it at about 7.90 percent today. Those
changes actually are off the highs, but a couple of times during the
period the long bond has touched 8 percent; it has seen pretty good
investor interest. The two-year rate at one point backed up to [a
level] about 60 or 65 basis points higher than it was at the time of
your last meeting.
Policy expectations in the market are pretty generally on
hold just now. A few people, probably economists more than investors,
feel that there could be another easing somewhere down the road.
It
is not a very widespread view. And a few are beginning to anticipate
a firming in policy, but this is seen to be a number of months away at
the earliest. The predominant view, as I say, is just a straight down
It seems to
the middle anticipation for at least some months ahead.
us that concerns about fresh fiscal stimulus, although they have been
there in marked form at times and are still in the background, have
abated along with a bit of a growing sense that Congress and the
Administration may not be able to get anything together in the near
term on that problem. As to operations, we had some reserve needs
late in the period. We've been meeting them recently largely through
repurchase agreements as we look forward to a big release of reserves
next month through the reduction in reserve requirements. That's all
I have to report, Mr. Chairman.

3/11/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Sternlight?
let's move on to Mike Prell.

If not,

MR. PRELL. Thank you.
In the last Greenbook we had a
forecast for the first quarter of only a slight increase of about 0.5
percent at an annual rate in real GDP and then a moderate pickup in
the second quarter. The data we've received since that time have been
somewhat mixed but on balance suggest to us that that general pattern
still is a reasonable guess.
If anything, though, I think the first
quarter could come in a bit higher rather than a bit lower than our
Greenbook guess.
But we wouldn't really see it as a material
difference at this juncture.
The tenor of the news from the retail sector has been better
than we anticipated but, of course, we'll know more statistically
tomorrow when we get the February retail sales release. The housing
market has been quite firm recently, largely in line with our
expectations or maybe a little better.
But given that the strength in
starts and new home sales seems to be so concentrated in the Midwest,
one wonders whether there is some statistical noise in the data and
whether things really have picked up as much as the data suggest.
And, of course, we have to be a little concerned looking forward about
the consequences of the backup in mortgage rates.
We have not heard
very much to indicate that that has put a dent in the market to this
point, although the mortgage bankers series does suggest that the
demand for new mortgage loans, whether for refinancing or for new
purchases, has slackened considerably in the last few weeks.
On the equipment side, the orders have looked a bit better
than we might have anticipated. We don't know whether that will be
domestic equipment spending or exports; but in any event it's output
and it's worth a little more perhaps than we had built into our
forecast. Nonresidential construction continues to look very weak.
The inventory situation is in broad terms in line with our expectation
that there would be an inventory adjustment in the first quarter.
The
fourth quarter came out worse than most people expected in terms of
accumulation. We only have a few data, manufacturing and wholesale
trade for January, that do show some liquidation. We think the
industrial production drop in January reflected this adjustment
process.
February appears to be a period of some considerable rebound
in manufacturing, probably not enough to fully offset the January
decline, however.
And we're still expecting to see the first quarter
overall down appreciably from the fourth-quarter level for industrial
production.
On the employment report, the unemployment increase was
generally in line with our expectation that it was going to go up
further.
The employment and hours figures were stronger than we
anticipated but there are some things in the data that lead us to
discount those numbers heavily. One is that the average workweek has
been very volatile in the last couple of years, and we find it very
difficult to buy the tremendous jump in the workweek that we saw in
the February numbers. Also, the payroll employment increase was in
essence totally in retail trade and in motor vehicles production. We
know there's a seasonal adjustment uncertainty with the retail trade
figures and consider it unlikely that we're really into a period of
substantial renewed growth in retail employment.
And in the
manufacturing sector, motor vehicle employment probably did increase
as the assembly schedules were [raised], but we don't expect ongoing
increases there.
So, as I said, on the whole there's a little better

3/11/92

tone than we had anticipated, but we think we're generally on the
track that we had of very modest increases in activity at this time-.
On the price side, the January consumer price index was
favorable relative to our expectations. We didn't get the so-called
January effect of some of the series that tend to be adjusted once a
On the whole, we think
year, [producing] a big increase in January.
developments are definitely in line with our expectations that the
price trends would be favorable.
Thank you, Mr Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mike?

MR. ANGELL. Mike, what are you seeing for energy prices,
mainly oil prices, for the remainder of 1992 as compared to your
earlier view of that?
MR. PRELL. I might defer to Charlie Siegman; I don't think
we've seen enough to change our assumptions greatly, which did have
pretty much a flat picture in oil prices.
MR. SIEGMAN. Right, we have not changed them, but we are in
the process of making the forecast for the next Greenbook. The little
blips in the oil price have not made us change the near-term forecast.
MR. LINDSEY. Mike, would you refresh our memories on what
the fiscal policy assumption was in the Greenbook?
MR. PRELL. Our fiscal policy assumption was for no change in
the overall fiscal picture except for the change in withholding
Of course, at this juncture, that seems to be a pretty
schedules.
good assumption in terms of the likelihood that [legislation] will be
On the other hand, we
passed and vetoed and there may be a stalemate.
really thought something probably would be passed by the spring; we
just didn't know what it would be.
There's still reason for
uncertainty. There is certainly talk that there may be some effort to
come back with a much slimmer package of things like passive losses
and some investment tax break and perhaps something for first-time
home buyers. But at this point we would probably resort to the same
statement of ignorance and not incorporate any new fiscal policy
assumption.
MR. PARRY. Mike, this is Bob Parry.
It appears as though
the economic [progress] among major industrial nations has
deteriorated a little. Have you changed the assumptions you have made
about economic growth in the industrialized nations?
MR. PRELL. Well, I should caution that we are just beginning
the Greenbook forecasting process and, as these things relate to the
pattern of activity out over the remainder of the year, we can't state
But Charlie may
with any great firmness where we're going to end up.
want to say something about how things are developing.
MR. SIEGMAN. The information coming in is still mixed with
In Japan, it looks as if
regard to whether there's a deterioration.
At the margin we
the weakness is getting a little more widespread.
would probably be scaling [the forecast] down, but it would not be a
One other item with regard to Germany is
very significant adjustment.
that price developments don't look very favorable, at least in the

3/11/92

near term, and that adds a certain amount of caution to any possible
adjustment by the Bundesbank.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
was not very good.

The figure that was released yesterday

MR. SIEGMAN. No, it was not very good; it was 4.3 percent
year-over-year, which is higher than previous months' year-over-year
figures.
And wage developments are also uncertain right now. There
are possibilities of strikes, and that adds other elements of
uncertainty in the German picture.
MR. PRELL. We also, of course, will have to incorporate the
developments in the exchange market. My intuition at this point is
that there has not been anything on the external side that suggests a
more favorable outlook for demand for U.S. produced goods over the
next few quarters.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions for Mike?

MS. PHILLIPS.
What about agriculture? There seems to have
been be a runup of prices in the last couple of weeks.
Is that
something related to the weather?
MR. PRELL. There have been weather effects.
There have been
effects flowing from deals with the former Soviet Union and so on.
I
don't think that picture has changed in any way that would have any
material effect on our forecast.
We still view that, looking out over
the next year or so, as an area containing some significant upside
price risks just because of the very lean levels of inventories. And
I don't think anything that has happened on the production side
changes that picture at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I assume that the wheat price runup
in recent data is wholly weather-related. The freeze came in after a
thaw.
MR. ANGELL.

It was a runup based upon a predicted freeze.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Did the predicted freeze show up?

I haven't checked.

MS. PHILLIPS. Yes, it's here right now! Apparently corn and
livestock prices have firmed; it's sort of across the board.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
let's go to Don Kohn.

Any other questions for Mike?

If not,

MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, growth in the monetary aggregates
has been appreciably stronger than we were expecting at the time of
the last FOMC meeting.
For February, we're looking at an M2 growth
rate of about 8-3/4 percent; the Bluebook had 4-3/4 percent. For M3,
we're looking at 6-1/4 percent and the Bluebook had 3 percent.
A lot
of this is in Ml.
Ml growth now looks to be at about a 27 percent
annual rate of increase in February versus about 18 percent in the
Bluebook. But it's not all Ml; the non-Ml part of M2 has accelerated
a bit and is stronger than we expected.
There are some special

3/11/92

factors here, especially mortgage prepayments and their effects on
demand deposits as those are held in accounts for forwarding to Ginnie
Mae and Fannie Mae. The other factor is that there was a change in
the timing of refunds.
There was a bulge in February, more than
usual, as people filed early and used the electronic filing process.
But even after taking account of those two factors, I think we still
got more strength in money than we were expecting. Basically, this is
a response to the sharp drops in interest rates last year. Most of
the strength is in the liquid accounts--savings, MMDAs, demand
deposits--whose rates have fallen but not very much and they're
relatively more favorable than those on time deposits and market
rates.
The strength in M3 is not a reflection of strength in bank
credit.
We're estimating about flat bank credit in February, after
growth of 3 percent in January and 6 to 7 percent in the fourth
quarter of last year.
Some of the tailing off is in the securities
portfolios, and we think that some of that is catching some of the
early prepayments in the collateralized mortgage obligations.
Business loans have been exceptionally weak the last few months.
Issues of bonds and stocks are being used to prepay [loans] and
perhaps inventories are declining as well.
But we do have quite a bit
of weakness in business loans.
Looking at the last few weeks, we've had a flattening in
money growth.
I think some of it is just noise.
It was stronger than
expected in February and we can expect a little weakness here. We do
have rising opportunity costs as market interest rates turn around
relative to deposit rates.
Demand deposits have flattened.
Perhaps
the prepayment pipeline is full and, although prepayments continue
very strong, we're not getting any additional push from that.
In any
case, even with very flat money growth in March we would be expecting
the aggregates for the December-to-March period still to be above what
the FOMC was anticipating at the last meeting.
We would have about
4-1/4 percent M2 growth relative to the 3 percent in the [directive]
and about 2 to 2-1/2 percent M3 versus the 1-1/2 percent that was in
the [directive].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

look?

Questions for Don?

MR. MULLINS. Don, two questions:
How does household M2
Secondly, what is the projection for March?

MR. KOHN. Household M2, Governor Mullins, has accelerated
through February.
For the uninitiated, household M2 is M2 minus
demand deposits and minus RPs and Eurodollars; that is, it takes out
some of these very volatile categories.
To give a little time series
on that, growth was about 1-1/2 percent in December, 2 percent in
January, and 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent in February. We do see that
flattening out.
We have projected very little growth, if any, in
March.
So, it's not just demand deposits that are flattening out;
it's also the increases in savings deposits and MMDAs.
They are still
increasing, but [the pace] is weakening a bit.
Time deposits continue
to run off at a rapid rate. In that regard, we continue to hear
about--and get weekly data suggesting--very large inflows continuing
into stock and bond mutual funds.
With regard to the March
projections for the aggregates, we are now projecting on a very
preliminary basis about 1-3/4 percent M2 growth, M3 about flat, and
about 13 percent Ml growth. That's on the basis of small weekly
increases from now to the end of the month.

3/11/92

MR. ANGELL.
Don, that does bring March then to just about
exactly on the midpoint of our target range from Q4?
MR. KOHN. Yes, Q4 to March would be 4-1/4 percent;
Q4 to February was more like 5-1/2 percent.

actually,

MR. KELLEY.
Don, do the differences between what you now
expect and what you expected before fall within what you would
Or are there some new factors
normally expect as a forecasting error?
that have shown up?
MR. KOHN. No, I'm pretty humble about our ability to
forecast this, given that we're not that far off. We had several
percentage points more strength in February, but [growth] is
flattening out in March. For the three months combined, it's not that
far different--approximately a percentage point off--from what we had
thought. We did have March weaker in our projection. We could see
that opportunity costs might widen as deposit rates went down and
So, we had some weakening in March built in
things like that.
already.
If not, I
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Don?
think it would be useful to hear from the presidents first, updating
their views on activity within each of the Districts and anything they
would like to add with respect to their views on the national scene.
MR. MCTEER.

Mr. Chairman, this is Bob McTeer from Dallas.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go ahead, Bob.

MR. MCTEER. Generally, everything is about the same:
The big exception is
Activity is rather flat in the Dallas District.
We've
that there seemed to be a surge in retail sales in February.
been getting anecdotal reports [on retail sales] from all over; we
even had Beigebook contacts call in unsolicited to report this and to
inquire whether other Beigebook contacts were reporting the same
thing. They're looking for confirmation since it seemed so strong
relative to what they had been experiencing and what they had been
expecting.
But that's the only major area that's different from what
it has been.
MR. FORRESTAL.
Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal from
Atlanta. We are seeing the beginnings of a surge in activity, if I
Like Bob
can put it that way. The housing market is stronger.
McTeer, we have anecdotal information about retail sales picking up.
The manufacturing sector is showing some rebound, particularly in
those areas related to housing such as furniture, carpets, glass, and
stone.
I also heard just recently that the packaging industry is
picking up considerably. But the interesting thing to me is that this
activity that is being reported, although not terribly robust, is
better than it was when we sat at the last FOMC meeting, and it's
fairly broadly based around the District; it isn't concentrated in any
I should add also that employment seems to be
particular area.
picking up in some of our states and discouraged workers seem to be
coming back into the marketplace. My sense is that confidence is
somewhat better; the tone is certainly better than it was several
So, things are looking somewhat better in the Sixth
weeks ago.
District.

3/11/92

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn in Chicago.
It
would be difficult to enumerate a long list of indicators that would
suggest a pickup in activity on a sustained basis, but there are some
decidedly encouraging signs out there.
I have not seen proof but I
think there is a developing expectation that things are going to get
better.
[For auto assemblies] the most recent trend is a little
disappointing but still, as Mike has commented, production levels in
the first quarter are some 6 to 7 percent higher than in the first
quarter of last year which admittedly was hardly a [unintelligible].
The early schedules for the second quarter also show an increase of 7
to 8 percent in production levels, so that's on the plus side.
Retail
sales certainly have improved. And, while the increases on a current
basis are rather slim, nonetheless clearly there is a better retail
attitude out there [than there was] in January and February. Many
retailers claim that they really are surprised by the strength that
they are seeing. More significantly, home sales have improved,
especially in the Midwest.
And I think the very significant
[unintelligible] that we've seen is very remarkable.
[However,]
there's a lot of noise in the numbers. We've had an extraordinarily
mild winter, which has helped; also the current inventory is pretty
low. One local residential retail dealer said he had a very, very
good February--in fact the best February he's ever had.
Therefore, I
think it's clear that lower rates are working their way through to the
residential market to show a definite improvement.
I must say that
while the situation is far from [certain], I do think that on balance
conditions in the Midwest are better. Attitudes are improved and the
signs are that the U.S. economy has bottomed out.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Parry in San Francisco.
It appears as though there really hasn't been any significant change
in the economic situation in the Twelfth District.
California remains
as weak as I indicated at our last FOMC meeting and some of the other
states such as Idaho and Utah continue to do very well. The only
thing I would note as a change is that there are some differences in
tone; the tone is somewhat more optimistic. We clearly have a much
better housing situation, and it appears as though sentiment has
improved somewhat. But I would characterize the changes at this point
as being quite minor.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to go back to Si and ask
for an update on Caterpillar.
MR. KEEHN. Well, the change there is basically for the
worse.
Caterpillar has called back some workers and [unintelligible]
UAW then struck those plants. The standoff continues: I think it's
worse. The [unintelligible] situation is deteriorating; the UAW
attitudes [unintelligible].
It clearly has gotten worse and there are
no signs that there is going to be a break because both sides have dug
in very hard.
It's the pattern issue that I commented on before that
is the breaking point.
MR. ANGELL.

Thank you.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, this is Dick Syron in Boston.
I
think the situation here is summed up by one of our contacts for the
Beigebook who said:
"The situation isn't good but it's better than
lousy."
People have felt bad for a long time here, and what we hear
from talking to people more extensively is very consistent with what

3/11/92

-10-

others have said today. Retailers are doing somewhat better than they
expected; they don't know about [the reliability of] exact comparisons
because of the CNN effect last year.
Auto dealers actually are doing
a fair bit better; there is improvement in real estate, etc.
Interestingly, the manufacturing sector is rather a mixed situation.
There is some deterioration in exports except [unintelligible] in
Latin America and in some of the less developed countries, the kind of
stuff that we sell.
Overall, though, we do see some signs of a pickup
beginning, but there are concerns about its durability and not a lot
of evidence that leads to expecting it to be very robust. A lot of
concern has to do more with long-term structural problems than the
current cyclical situation in our region. Thank you.
MR. STERN. This is Gary Stern. We have seen modest
improvements in a wide range of areas. Retail sales look reasonably
good; part of that, as I've commented before, is Canadians coming
across the border to take advantage of lower prices here.
People in
agriculture are generally positive, as you might expect, and the
largest component of the mining sector at least looks pretty good.
Around the Twin Cities in particular, housing activity--both new
construction and sales of existing units--has been quite strong.
[Unintelligible] also has picked up and I suspect this may be true in
some of the other major metropolitan areas as well.
We have a fairly
large regional industry out here--[perhaps the largest] except for
north of Boston--and one firm said they just can't keep up with the
business; they're adding people almost daily. There's a huge volume
of funds flowing in and it really is generating lots of activity.
MR. HOENIG. Tom Hoenig in Kansas City.
I'd like to report
that our District is pretty much status quo.
There is some slight
improvement in the retail sales area, which is a positive sign to us.
Auto sales have picked up a little also.
The housing area has been
very robust, as others have reported, but how sustainable it is, I
think we'll just have to wait and see.
In the agricultural area, our
folks report that there has been some increase in the weaker credits
in the banks that are related to agriculture. However, the borrowers
are better prepared to deal with that and, with the stabilization of
prices somewhat in livestock and the increases in grain prices, they
are pretty optimistic [for the period ahead].
The energy sector here
is still very weak. Jobs and the rig counts continue to fall; right
now the rig count is about 25 percent below a year ago. So, that area
is not picking up at all.
That pretty much describes the view.
MR. LAWARE. Tom, when you say the housing area is robust,
what are you referring to:
new houses, starts, permits, or the
refinancings?
MR. HOENIG. Permits at this point, although refinancing is
also very strong. New home sales are up a fair amount from a year ago
and the inventories in that market are dropping.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you.

MR. OLTMAN. Mr. Chairman, this is Jim Oltman in New York.
I
think the mood here can be described, following on Peter Sternlight's
description of the mood of the market, as one of cautious optimism. I
would say that with a fairly heavy emphasis on "cautious."
There has
been some improvement in the last several months in department store

3/11/92

-11-

sales and some uptick in new home sales, but there's a great deal of
concern about the longer-term structural problems that may be lurking
Bankers particularly, I
there--the kind that Dick Syron alluded to.
think, are not at all convinced--assuming that this is a recovery-that it is a recovery of the kind they are familiar with.
Refinancings of mortgages are going into shortening the terms of those
mortgages to an unprecedented degree. And, as has been mentioned by
several people already, the movement [of funds] particularly into
equity [and] bond markets continues at a significant rate. Although I
think there's a general attitude that things are not as good as had
been hoped, there is some ground for increased confidence.
MR. BOEHNE.
The Philadelphia area economy is much as has
been described around the country. I would say overall conditions
suggest steady to some modest growth. We've seen the same uptick in
retail sales and traffic going through retailers as has been evidenced
I think there are some real dollar increases over
around the country.
In
The automobile dealers report increases in sales.
a year ago.
manufacturing, we've seen increases in new orders, production, and
One of the more striking features there is that as their
shipments.
orders and business have picked up in the short term they're
I'm
questioning once more what is going to happen in the longer term.
not quite sure what that is unless it's just a psychological feeling
that if things are bad, they're going to get better and, if they're
good, they may not last. That may be the feeling they have. We have
strength in sales of used homes, although there is some pickup in new
homes.
Commercial and industrial real estate is still very soft.
Bankers have not seen an increase in loan demand outside the
residential mortgage area. There are new loans in the pipeline that
are being made but the paydowns of existing loans are still offsetting
the increases. Attitudes are somewhat better, but they're very
But I think if you asked
cautious.
It's a wait-and-see attitude.
"Yes, this may be the beginnings of a
most people they would say:
recovery."
MR. MELZER.
Alan, this is Tom Melzer. I'm glad I didn't
have to go first to try to jump start things today; it took a while to
happen. In our District we're seeing the same things in terms of
retail sales and residential real estate that others have reported.
What has been most striking to
And the problem is sort of the same.
me is that in the manufacturing area we're seeing the potential for
We're seeing
what may be some widespread employment gains.
a tire manufacturer,
established manufacturers calling workers back:
a major household appliance producer, an electric motors company.
This is on top of, in the case of the major appliance producer,
new
We're also seeing expansion in activity:
earlier callbacks.
We're also
plants in aerospace, plastics, jet engines, and steel.
seeing some relocations, which will result in employment gains in the
District.
My feeling is that people don't think about relocating and
consolidating plant operations and so forth if they are concerned
So, that's where we've seen the most striking new
about the outlook.
piece of anecdotal information. Just on a broader note-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
is aerospace improvement?

Tom, before you go on, how much of that

-12-

3/11/92

MR. MELZER. Actually, what I had in mind there is a new
It wouldn't be
plant that has to do with the shuttle space program.
here in St. Louis.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
activities?

They are moving some of their

MR. MELZER. I think McDonnell on net is laying people off;
they're adding some engineers here but on balance I think it's
probably pretty flat.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go ahead.

I interrupted you;

I'm sorry.

MR. MELZER. On a broader note I would suspect we're still
going to see mixed data. Right now, as Bill mentioned in his foreign
exchange report, everybody is reacting to the positive information.
It wouldn't surprise me as we go on here and see some additional
negative information to have expectations swing in the other
direction. But from a monetary policy point of view, I think we have
to be very cautious about responding to that because I do have the
feeling that we may be at the incipient stage of a recovery. And our
focus is going to have to shift from the concept of trying to let more
line out to getting the line back in. I'm not talking about when we
next meet certainly, but I think we just have to be very cautious at
this stage about how we react to incoming data and shifting
I expect them to continue to be quite volatile, and we
expectations.
have to take a longer-term view of things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We're still missing Cleveland and

Richmond.
MR. BLACK.
Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Black. I would also
[be cautious about] overpredicting either the timing or the strength
of the recovery very accurately, to a large extent because of all the
On the side of
structural changes superimposed upon cyclical factors.
conventional wisdom, this quarter [unintelligible] and we ought to do
better next quarter.
As far as the District is concerned, we have not gotten
anything that statistically supports that rebound [unintelligible]
[There seems to be an] improved outlook on the part of the retailers,
So, I
manufacturers, and most every other respondent in our survey.
think the expectations are better. One main fear that seems to be
cropping up in a lot of people's minds is what is happening to the
I'm not sure I understand [why it is
long end of the yield curve.
But the [long end of the
happening]; I don't know if anybody does.
yield curve] does bother me and I think, along with a lot of other
people in this part of the country, it has made clear that the markets
feel that [the progress on] the price level may weaken somewhat or
that at least for the time being we're not paying as much attention to
So, we are rather cautious about the outlook
it as we were earlier.
for the economy.
MR. JORDAN. This is Jerry Jordan in Cleveland. I have not
had a full briefing yet on conditions in the District since arriving,
but my first impression yesterday was how incredibly cold it is here!
Part of the District, though, is not different--

-13-

3/11/92

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Incidentally, Jerry, I think we here at
the Board will forecast for you that it will get warmer over the next
six months!
Conditions here certainly are
MR. JORDAN. Very good news.
not different from what is being reported for other Districts around
One statement that we can make is that it is not getting
the country.
In
any worse and that there has been a very tentative improvement.
fact, retail sales in February were reportedly better than expected
though there is not a lot of confidence about how sustainable that is
yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would any of the governors like to hold
forth on any of these issues or ask questions amongst ourselves or to
the presidents?
MR. ANGELL. I'd like to return to the oil price question and
If the
the exchange rate question. Charlie, what I'm wondering is:
dollar is on the stronger side, as some of us have been suggesting for
the last six weeks, and if the economies abroad in Europe and Japan
are on somewhat subdued growth paths, how would you expect the price
of oil to be able to be increased in deutschemark and yen terms?
Under those somewhat lessened demand conditions, would there not be a
tendency for the price of oil to remain somewhat stable in those
currencies and to rise in dollars?
MR. SIEGMAN. The difference we're talking about is
relatively small. The current price-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

You meant the falling prices.

Yes.

MR. SIEGMAN. Our assumption for the oil price for the full
year is around $18 [a barrel].
MR. ANGELL.

I know.

MR. SIEGMAN. That is
prices. And partly it's going
its control of the supply. If
then that's likely to keep the

not very much different from prevailing
to be affected by what OPEC does with
they are successful in curbing sales,
price--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. This is getting increasingly more
It strikes me
dubious with the fiscal problems that the Saudis have.
as less than.credible that they're about to rein in their liftings in
any material way. And while it is true that there have been some
minor cutbacks across the board among the other OPEC members, it seems
I would assume that, if
that it's really well under their desires.
anything, non-OPEC demand for crude at this stage has to be scaled
down a shade from where we would have had it a number of weeks ago.
MR. SIEGMAN.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. And we are not even raising the issue
that Governor Angell is raising with respect to the exchange rate
question.

-14-

3/11/92

MR. SIEGMAN. We will review the assumptions for the next
forecast very carefully.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think it's going to be hard to hold
the price up there if for no other reason than that the pressures at
this stage I would assume are for [production in] Kuwait to start to
come back; Kuwait is adding 100,000 barrels a day every quarter or
every couple of months.
And the Iraqis could really open up [their
production] if all of a sudden they reached some sort of deal, which
no one is counting on.
It probably won't happen soon, but at some
point it is going to happen.
MR. MULLINS. There always remains the possibility of some
disruptions in that region.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That never happens!

MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, if there were a significant drop
[in oil prices] from current levels, I think that would make a dent in
our forecast. But at this point we're talking about differences from
where we expect things to be later in the year of only a dollar or
two. And that was within the range of various factors that could be
changed in this forecast.
I don't think we're way off track at this
point. But if, as suggested, there is a risk of a material decline
from these levels, then prospects would look a little different.
MR. ANGELL.
Well, I was thinking more in terms of $2 a
barrel, which is I guess within your range of not-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

$2 a barrel is material.

MR. ANGELL.
Well, it seems to me that it's material.
It
also seems to me that it almost works, in terms of our imports, like a
reduction in taxes.
MR. SIEGMAN.

Yes.

MR. PRELL.
Well, it's clearly a plus but I think we're
talking about a few tenths at most on output or prices over the course
of 1992.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Given the level that we're at, a few
tenths is not insignificant.
Any further questions, discussion, or
items to be brought to the table by anybody?
If not, let me close by
thanking you all.
I thought this was a most useful meeting. We look
forward to seeing you at the next meeting on March 31st.
END OF SESSION

