Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
October 1, 1991
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, October 1, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Parry

Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey,
Promisel, Scheld, Simpson, Slifman,
and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

-2Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Johnson, Assistant Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Lang,
Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Rolnick, and
Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis,
Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia,
Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas,
respectively

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
October 1, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. We have Tom
Hoenig with us--officially this time--and I gather, Tom, that this is
your first day as president.
MR. HOENIG.
to all of you.
MR. BOEHNE.

As a matter of fact it is and that's a warning

It's all up hill from now on!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
of the August 20th meeting?
MR. KELLEY.
MR. SYRON.

Would somebody like to move the minutes

So move.
Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
a number of issues on the table.
MR. CROSS.

Sam Cross, you have

[Statement--see Appendix.]

Mr. Chairman, I also might take a moment to mention that we
circulated a memorandum to the Committee on questions related to the
investment of our German marks. As the memorandum points out, almost
all of our marks are in a three-month double-forward facility with the
Bundesbank. This causes a problem for the Bundesbank in terms of some
mismatch between that facility and the two-month repo position that
the Bundesbank uses these funds for.
They are concerned and have been
seeking to get some change in that facility, and we're looking into
the possibility of some modification. We need to work this out, of
course, with the Bundesbank and the Treasury and there are many
technical questions that we have to look into.
The memorandum also suggests that we might look at some
possible change in our approach more broadly.
I mentioned the
possibility of a three-point approach for dealing with these DM and
yen balances. The first element would be that we would work out an
arrangement whereby either regularly or from time to time as seems
appropriate we would put the earnings we receive on these various
reserve holdings back into the market or sell them in other ways.
The
second element would be that we would continue to look for further
opportunities for off-market exchanges such as those that we carried
out and are still in the process of carrying out with both the Bank of
Japan and the Bundesbank and thereby reduce some of our reserve
holdings in that manner if it seemed appropriate. Then, thirdly, I
suggested that we might also consider some modest diversification of
our facilities so that they might be less heavily focused on these
very short-term, three-month facilities which are available on a twoday notice--less heavily focused in this Bundesbank facility and other
similar facilities.
We might think about putting a somewhat greater
portion, for example, in the BIS or in some other arrangement of that
sort.
We'd try to work out this matter with the Bundesbank; it is
causing them concern because it does put them in a position whereby
they have to explain to their GAO and auditors why they have a
facility with us that can cause them to make losses out of profits.

10/1/91

And as part of this general examination we could also consider some
diversification so that we might move a small portion of the balances
into somewhat longer German government paper beyond the 12-month limit
that we've been held to up to this point. There's very little of this
very short-term paper available in Germany, and for reasons of
diversification it might be appropriate to consider a somewhat more
flexible approach. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any questions for Mr. Cross?

MR. BOEHNE.
One question, Sam:
for off-market sales of marks?

What are the real prospects

MR. CROSS.
Well, we're about halfway through the process
that we worked out with the Bundesbank to cover the months from July
through December. After that, I do not think the Bundesbank would be
unwilling to consider some further possible exchanges next year.
I
mentioned as a part of the approach that we would continue to look for
such opportunities.
I assume there is a possibility that both we and
the Bundesbank might find it in our mutual interest and therefore
advisable.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the Domestic Desk.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Appendix.]

Any other questions?

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Peter Sternlight,

[Statement--see

President Corrigan, do you want to add

anything?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, let me just say a couple of
further words on the Salomon situation. As Peter has indicated, and
as I think is widely known, the status of Salomon as a primary dealer
is under active review. Just so the Committee understands the way
that all came about, Gutfruend called me on Friday the 9th of August
and first revealed the initial violations. We sent them a letter the
following Monday, which they got on Tuesday, in which we basically
said that in view of what they had disclosed they had 10 days to make
their case on why they should be retained as a primary dealer.
That
letter, I think, prompted the second round of disclosures, which
didn't come easily I might add. And when the full scope of the second
round of disclosures became apparent, I told them--and this was all in
consultation with the Treasury and the Chairman, so I was not acting
in a vacuum--that signals were off for the 10 days and that they
should not conclude that the Tuesday letter meant that we might not
take immediate action. And I think it's fairly clear that that
message was what, in turn, prompted the decision of Strauss and
Gutfruend to resign and Buffet to come on board. There was no horse
trading about this.
But we did decide here on Friday morning in the
Chairman's office that in those circumstances we would give them a
little more breathing room to make their case.
So, in effect, we did
give them an extension, which has now run its course.
They have
submitted to us a rather voluminous set of documents laying out all
the changes they've made and all the changes they plan and so forth,
and that is under evaluation. Nevertheless, we are rapidly
approaching the point where the decision time will be at hand.
Indeed, I would be very surprised if whatever decision we make is not

10/1/91

made sometime around the middle to the end of this month.
it going beyond the end of this month.

I can't see

At this point, I don't want to try to prejudge that decision.
And above all we recognize that the Board of Governors and the
Committee have a natural and appropriate interest in both the decision
and the decisionmaking process, if for no other reason--and there are
others as well--that there are possible decisions in the spectrum of
all that might be considered that could have very major implications
not just for the firm but for markets as well. As that gets closer we
will, of course, make sure that appropriate means and mechanisms are
followed to satisfy those natural interests. Obviously, we will have
to consult with the Treasury and the SEC as well.
Even though I don't think it has to bear on the decision,
whatever it is, I can't underscore enough how large and how complex
this firm is.
If you look at it relative to Drexel, for example,
Drexel literally looks like a fly on an elephant's behind in terms of
both size and complexity. The balance sheet, as Peter said, is down
to something a little over $100 billion now. But again, unlike
Drexel, not insignificant parts of this balance sheet are booked in
foreign offices in a multiple-currency type environment now, with
significant balance sheet assets denominated in various foreign
currencies. Their global operations are several orders of magnitude
different from anything we've seen to date. But I think the biggest
element of potential complexity is the off-balance sheet. The offbalance sheet in total notational terms is about $650 billion, isn't
[Secretary's note: Ms. Lovett replied in the affirmative.]
it Joan?
Again, that's bigger than a bread basket. One of the things, of
course, that you see when you confront this kind of situation is that
although everybody says you can net positions down and all that, it
doesn't work that easily in practice. The most complex element of the
off-balance sheet by far is the swap book. The swap book aggregates
to $320 billion; the rest of it is foreign exchange, futures, and
forward mortgage-backed securities. They're complicated in their own
right but one could at least visualize how those things can be taken
care of. The swap book is a horse of an entirely different color. It
involves multiple categories of counterparties all over the world.
And the swap book was, among other things, the instrumentality through
which these incredibly complex hedging positions were developed.
So, it's not as if you can take the swap book and carve it
out without the carving out itself having very important implications
for all the other instruments both on and off the balance sheet. And
maturities in the swap book can run out as much as 10 years; they're
not just interest rate swaps. Some of them are highly complex swaps
that involve both interest rates and exchange rates. Some have three
or four or five interest rate/swap-type transactions that are tied up
with currency swaps that might involve six or seven different
currencies, and that's basically one transaction. But the difficulty
with the swap book other than its complexity is that writers of swaps
essentially have either an implicit or offer a very explicit
responsibility to buy them back and/or to make a market. Now, the
problem that creates is that if the thing starts to slip, what will
happen just as sure as any of us are sitting here is the
counterparties that are net plus in individual swaps will put them
back and the ones that are net minus will take to the hills. And that
can create some rather unusual difficulties. But I say that just so

10/1/91

people recognize that this is an extremely big and very, very complex
firm. Again, it's not that that by itself bears on what one does or
does not do; but it does say that, as a part of the process of coming
to whatever conclusions have to be reached, we have to consider, and
we are doing so seriously, possible contingencies that could arise.
Mr. Chairman, I think that's all I want to say at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for either Jerry or Peter?

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think the understatement in your
comments is that this Committee and others in the System have some
interest in all of this.
This is probably not the forum, but I have
some strong interests, and perhaps other people do too, not only in
the implications for the financial markets--and I think you've given
us a hint by talking about swaps just what some of the implications
and some of the contingencies are--but also, closer to home, just how
vulnerable we are as an institution in all of this.
Again, this is
probably not the place to talk about it, but I think it is important
to talk about it in some forum.
MR. LAWARE. Jerry, would the removal of the primary dealer
status bring the firm down?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's obviously a tough
question. The prevailing view among people in the markets here and
abroad, including some very prominent foreign officials--the
prevailing view among those who choose to express a view about that to
me--is, yes. Now, that doesn't mean that view is right. We ourselves
certainly think that is a possibility.
It's one of these things that
is so hard to judge.
MR. LAWARE.

Yes.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A second question, of course, is
that even if you thought it would, how do you judge the follow-on
systemically?
And a propos Ed Boehne's questions, from an
institutional point of view, there are risks on both sides even of
that.
Now, there are certainly people who say that our institutional
reputation is damaged if we don't do something like that.
But if we
did it and it produced that kind of problem, our institutional
reputation could be damaged in the opposite direction. So, it's a
very, very difficult question.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What we need is a Solomon!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

We surely do.

MR. MELZER. Jerry, as this begins to sort itself out--I
don't know what the potential is but obviously we're dealing with
confidence here--it seems to me that an important part of this, if it
were at all possible, is not having whatever decision is reached
jumped on by key politicians right and left.
I don't know what that-comment.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I think that's the thrust of Ed's
But there's not a win-win there that I can see.
MR. MELZER.

Right.

10/1/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Jerry, I think there are two kinds of responses
that we can be involved in. One is the response to a firm that has
violated the ethical principles in regard to falsifying reports, which
is an issue in itself. But the other problem that seems to me is very
important to the Federal Reserve is that we address the entire
question of whether or not a small group, in a sense, ought to have
that privileged access. And in that vein I'm wondering how far down
the road it would be for us to be able to have an electronic ability
at various firms to make their bids.
I presume that takes quite a bit
of software as well as hardware.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, let me say two things about
that, Wayne. First, as you know, as part of this interagency review
process we are looking very hard at what steps can be taken to
accelerate the programs that are already on the drawing board.
I
don't have a firm answer as to how much can be done to accelerate that
process.
It is unambiguously clear that some kind of electronic
bidding system would help [alleviate] some of these problems. But it
is not by any means a panacea. I think, for example, that what
Salomon did was three things:
One is that they violated the auction
rules; two is that they systematically lied about it; and three is
that they used the set of customer relationships that are all within
existing rules to piece together these very complicated financing
arrangements for themselves and their customers that produced the
"squeeze."
Squeezes can be good; squeezes can be bad.
That's a
problem in its own right.
In any event, that produces these
distortions either in terms of the price of the underlying security or
the pricing of the RP in the marketplace. Now, those latter things,
whether one thinks they're good or bad, could have been done entirely
within the existing rules.
That may say that the rules are wrong; but
they could have been done entirely within the existing rules. And
that issue in my mind is in some ways more fundamental than the fact
that they broke the rules.
It has nothing to do with the question of
penalties, of punishments fitting the crimes, and all that.
In terms
of the way the market works, an electronic bidding system isn't going
to do a darn thing to deal with those issues.
The other thing that is important to keep in mind is that one
can at least speculate--and that's all it is--that even the most
sophisticated electronic bidding system and trading system might still
result in a situation, and indeed I suspect would result in a
situation, in which there still would be a relatively small number of
large institutional players that are going to be a very, very
prominent if not dominant part of this market.
In addition, even the
most sophisticated electronic bidding and trading system in and of
itself does not provide the answer to the question of who our
counterparties are.
And that's where the nub of the so-called moral
hazard problem arises.
Because as long as we have to deal with
somebody, there has to be some kind of objective standard.
In this
day and age of "Government in the Sunshine" and all the rest of it, we
wouldn't last 5 minutes saying:
"Well, that's our business and nobody
else's business."
So, while the electronics can and will help a lot,
and frankly in retrospect we probably--not probably, we should have
been putting more emphasis on that--as you know very well, it was
perceived as a question of priorities. We've put huge amounts of
resources into the upgrading of the book entry system itself; we've

10/1/91

put huge amounts of resources into Treasury direct; we've put huge
amounts of resources in the savings bond thing; and the perception was
that the auction system was working well.
It didn't seem, certainly
to me--and I was wrong--to be at the front end of the priority list in

terms of intensive application of new technology.
MR. ANGELL.
I don't want to debate all these questions at
this point, but I do think it's very important that the marketplace

and the public perceive that we're very sensitive to an open access
bidding system and that we really ought to give a lot of priority to
making certain that that option is available so that as the discussion

takes place we are not seen as holding up that process.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I agree completely with that.

And,

really--Dave has been working with us on this--we will be putting a
full court press on that. But I don't want to leave the impression
with anybody that once we fix that, we've fixed all these other
problems because that just doesn't follow.
MR. ANGELL. I understand and I'll be very happy at some
other time to talk about some of those other problems.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions?

MR. MELZER. I just want to make one follow-up comment.
Thinking about what John [LaWare] was saying--and again not prejudging
where this ought to come out--it seems to me that one can draw a
distinction between violations in the auction process, which the
Treasury oversees, and our decision with respect to primary dealers,
which is whom we choose to deal with to execute our transactions. It
just seems to me, getting back to John's point, that in effect as a
punishment--and maybe it's perceived by some as an appropriate
punishment--that implicitly the statement the Fed is making is that
we're not comfortable dealing with these people. I can just imagine
what the reaction will be. It will be "The Fed must know something
about this that we don't know," if they say they're not comfortable
dealing [with that firm].
That's a pretty serious statement, it seems
to me. And if somehow a distinction could be made between those two
issues--the Treasury bidding process and our role in executing
transactions--which is a distinction you've made before, I think it's
an important one.
MR. SYRON. The one problem with this and the reason for the
extensive discussion is that it is perceived--and I think Ed's comment
is very appropriate--correctly or incorrectly by many people out there
that the appropriate sanction applier, if I can use that term, is the
Federal Reserve. Now, if that is not how it's done--and I'm not
judging that one way or another--then there has to be a way, given
what happened, that that issue is somehow defused and it's clear what
the sanctions are and why the Federal Reserve is not the appropriate
one [to apply sanctions] and what it is that whoever is appropriate is
doing.
MR. MELZER. Yes, we can suspend them from the auction
process without pulling their primary dealership; that's what I'm
saying.

10/1/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The trouble, unfortunately, is that what
we can't do is suspend them temporarily as a primary dealer.
MR. MELZER.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's like executing somebody technically
and then resuscitating them. If there are no further questions on
this issue or to Peter, may I have a motion to ratify the actions of
the Desk?
MR. SYRON.

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is there a second?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
the economic discussion. Mike Prell.
MESSRS. PRELL and PROMISEL.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We now move on to

[Statements--see Appendix.]

Questions for either gentleman?

MR. BOEHNE. Mike, that was really an excellent opening
I think it really
statement about the economy and where we are.
I have a question about the profile of the
summarized it quite well.
recovery. The profile in the Greenbook is essentially a real growth
rate of about 3 percent, give or take a few tenths in either
direction, starting in the third quarter and going out through the
forecast period. Yet, I think the typical historical pattern has been
that in the initial quarters--the first two or three quarters--we tend
to get a more rapid growth rate and then it begins to slow. I'm
wondering in your analysis of past recoveries if you think that there
is anything in the sort of jump-start dynamics earlier in a recovery
that we have to have a faster growth to get it going and then it tends
to slow and whether, if we only get 3 percent in the initial quarter,
that's enough jump-start action to keep the recovery going in
subsequent quarters.
MR. PRELL. I think that notion has some intuitive appeal.
It's not something that one can discern in terms of the behavioral
relationships that are sort of the averages through cycles that are
embodied in econometric models. My sense is that where this in fact
may be a part of the current process is that some sectors are having a
The housing sector,
more muted initial response for various reasons.
for example, is perhaps not having as big a kick from declining
mortgage rates as we've had in some past cycles, and we are not seeing
a big pent-up demand for consumer durables. We didn't get a big surge
initially, and this may have tended to contribute to this sense that
And with the rather negative tone
things are really not picking up.
that I referred to earlier, in those circumstances the confidence may
not be there on the part of businessmen to proceed to the next phases
of restocking and pickup in investment as might have occurred
previously.
So, in a sense, the initial sluggishness may be
continuing to retard [activity] as people just don't get the sense
that things are falling in place and that they should proceed with
So, it may be
confidence in making investments to meet future demand.
I don't see that, though, as
that there's some of that dynamic here.

10/1/91

necessarily suggesting that this [recovery] has to peter out. We have
this continuation of what we think is the beginning now of a moderate
growth path.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mike, this is related to Ed Boehne's question.
This forecast incorporates our usual assumption of no change in rates,
which you essentially had to make.
In going back and looking at our
forecasts historically, we have quite a substantial change in rates
from what they have been. I'm wondering in going forward whether you
think the difference between these expectations of rate changes and
what the economy has done has been caused primarily by external
differences and what is going on in the real economy. That's one
factor. And how much--and you addressed this somewhat already--is it
a change in the responsiveness of the economy to a fall in rates?
It's impossible to give a precise weighting on that, but I'd be
interested in your speculation about that, particularly going forward.
MR. PRELL. Ted Truman presented an interesting econometric
result--I think it was in the chart show--which indicated in essence
that to a first approximation the decline in interest rates that had
occurred since the beginning of this year had effectively offset the
surprise we have seen in the dollar, which we had not anticipated to
appreciate as it did.
Thus, if you looked at where output would be
sometime out in 1992, these were compensating forces. Now, what
caused the dollar to do that--whether it was exogenous events and
political factors and so on or part of the internal endogenous
dynamics in the economic system--is hard to say.
But some political
factors clearly were involved in that development.
MR. SYRON. So you might say this was different in the past
and you wouldn't necessarily forecast that that would continue?
MR. PRELL. Well, I would not discount entirely the notion
that some of the responses to the financial developments that we have
seen in the economy may have differed from what we have observed in
the past.
There's a complex of factors in terms of term structure and
financial flows and the credit crunch aspects of this and so on that
you'd have a hard time matching up against previous history. My sense
is that the key interest-sensitive sector, housing, has responded to
the easing in rates; that did happen. And we expect the recent easing
to continue that process.
Inventory investment has been very cautious
and we've been a bit surprised. On the other hand, there haven't been
other things occurring that should have driven firms to restock
aggressively. So, maybe things are not out of kilter there; the basic
elements of the cyclical dynamics are there. And it's really hard to
discern how much they've departed in degree from the past.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY.
I have two questions.
One is on nonresidential
construction of structures.
There has been a very protracted and also
sharp fall-off for 13 quarters.
Is that almost unique in terms of
cyclical history?
MR. PRELL.

This is an extraordinary slump.

10/1/91

MR. PARRY.

The duration clearly is; is it the biggest drop?

MR. PRELL. Right, it's very long; it started a while back
and it is very protracted by historical standards.
In terms of
gauging how far it might go, we think it's reasonably aligned with
what we can see already in the construction contracts and permits
data, which have some lead time in them. We think that there is still
[in train] a significant decline in office and hotel construction and
probably in other commercial construction to some degree and that
we're likely to see only modest improvements over the next year or so
beginning in industrial construction and maybe in some utilities
construction. This just looks like a very weak sector. The vacancy
rates have remained high to date despite the fall-off in construction
of office buildings. We just don't see a basis at this point for an
improvement there. And the financing situation is obviously not a
But, given the fundamentals, that's just a side story. Nobody
plus.
in their right mind would finance the construction of a new building
in many of the major cities.
MR. PARRY.

I would assume that after that process is

completed some of the major excesses that occurred prior to that would
Let me ask a question on inventories.
pretty well be offset.
Clearly, the pattern for the next couple of quarters is going to be
dramatically impacted by what happens in that area. What you had for
the third quarter is the continuation of a very conservative inventory
policy. We have July numbers; we have production and sales numbers
for August. Are they basically consistent with a nonfarm inventory
liquidation of that magnitude, which is really still very substantial?
MR. PRELL.
In fact, as we noted in the footnote in this
Greenbook as we had in the prior one, we actually perceive the
liquidation as likely to be larger than the number we wrote down in
the Greenbook, given our expectation that the inventory liquidation in
the second quarter would be lower. We've circulated some revised
tables.
MR. PARRY.

We have them.

They have that in them?

MR. PRELL. Under this cover sheet are the revised forecast
There is a substantial liquidation still
tables that we distributed.
in the third quarter. We think that is consistent with the July
numbers, anticipating that in the subsequent months there will be a
little less liquidation and that as we move into the fourth quarter
we're going to move toward to some end to that liquidation. But even
the fourth quarter we perceive at this point to be in negative
territory on a GNP basis.
So, we think it's consistent with the
production figures and the import figures and the limited inventory
data we have. But we're dealing with a very small amount of data on
the third quarter.
MR. PARRY.

Sure.

MR. PRELL.

And there's room for a surprise, certainly.

MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

10/1/91

-10-

MR. ANGELL. Yes, Larry, I'd like to ask a question about
Japan. We understand that just-in-time inventory management seems to
be in place in Japan and certainly Japan appears to have rather high
short-term real interest rates.
Is there some possibility that the
heavier rate of production in the first and second quarters is an
inventory surge that still has to be looked at as a threat to the
continued growth of the Japanese real GNP?
MR. PROMISEL. Well, it's hard to rule that out, but I
wouldn't think so.
I think inventories have been held in pretty good
shape; in the second quarter, I'm not sure how well they did.
The
Japanese are talking quite a bit about the need to get investment
going--I'm referring to fixed investment, not inventory investment--at
this time, and they are concerned about increasing their output
capacity as demand increases. My sense is that they do not have an
overhang of inventories that is going to damp significantly the output
rise over the near term, although we do not expect a very robust
growth in Japan in the near term. We have growth fairly sluggish in
the second half of this year and picking up only to about the rates of
potential growth, maybe 3-1/2 to 4 percent, in 1992.
So, we're not
anticipating very strong growth, but I don't know that an overhang of
inventories would be a major downside risk in that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for the two
gentlemen?
If not, shall we move ahead with the round table?
would like to begin?
Bob.

Who

MR. BLACK. Well, I think getting a hand on the true state of
the economy and its near-term prospects is about as difficult this
time as it has been at any time I've ever been involved in it, and
I've been doing this longer than I would like to remember. Much of
the anecdotal information that we've been getting lately has been
negative and discouraging. Of course, there is some positive news-especially in the manufacturing area--and similarly the statistics are
pretty mixed. But despite all that conflicting information, I think
the staff has made a particularly strong case for the kind of moderate
growth that they're projecting here.
And I think it's important to
bear in mind that this is just a moderate [recovery] and not in any
sense a strong one.
Real GNP, for example, is expected to grow at
only slightly above what most people assume to be the long-run
economic potential. So, if this is all that happens, this recovery is
definitely going to be on the slow end of those that we've had in the
postwar period. Our guess is that the downside risk on the forecast,
while somewhat greater than the upside risk, is not as much greater as
most people appear to think today. We're all aware of the downside
risk presented by such things as the weakness in M2, apparently
continuing restraint on credit supplies to some industries and in some
geographical areas, the fiscal restraint in the federal and the state
and local government [sectors], and the heavy overhang of commercial
real estate throughout the country. But balancing all these
negatives, at least to some extent, are strong increases in the
leading indicators of manufacturing activity, an apparent reduction in
the underlying inflationary pressures--although Mike did explain very
clearly that that's not an unambiguous signal--and the substantial
reductions that we in the Federal Reserve have effected on short-term
and long-term rates.

10/1/91

-11-

The one aspect of this recovery that does appear to be clear
to me, really, is that we have made substantial progress toward
reducing inflation or the underlying trend rate of inflation. The
staff's projection of about a 3-1/2 percent rate by late next year in
the context of continued moderate real growth seems pretty reasonable
to us. And if we can get 3-1/2 percent next year and then maybe 2-1/2
percent in 1993, then I think we will be closing in on what is
effectively price stability. Now, I'm certainly aware of the risk
that excessive monetary restraint could damage the economy and its
apparently precarious position and that we could make it more
difficult, if not impossible, to achieve sustained price stability.
So, we definitely want to exercise a degree of caution. But at the
same time I think it's important that we not be too cautious. We
clearly have some momentum in reducing the inflation rate now; our
credibility is growing and that will not only increase our chances of
attaining our goal but will also reduce the cost of attaining it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth Federal Reserve
District economy is producing mixed signals at the present time.
For example, unlike
Several sectors are reporting continued declines.
the recovery occurring elsewhere in the nation, the District's
manufacturing sector continues to contract.
California has been
particularly hard hit, having lost 38,000 aerospace jobs since January
Banks are reporting loan levels that have fallen faster
of last year.
than in the nation as a whole; total loans are down 3.6 percent from
the level a year ago. Retail sales are reported to be sluggish
throughout most of the District, although in the states of Arizona and
Construction and real estate
Idaho there is the report of strength.
activity are weak, with continued job losses in July reported in the
District; and nonresidential construction activity remains weak,
particularly in California. Residential sales, after rebounding in
the spring, have declined for three consecutive months.
There are other indicators, however, that are turning
positive. Total employment in the District rose in July for the first
The July increase occurred in all District states
time in six months.
except Alaska, and it left the District's employment approximately 0.2
percentage points over what it was a year earlier. Trade employment
rose for the first time in six months while service jobs were added at
a solid 4.7 percent annualized rate between June and July.
If I can turn to the national outlook, we expect to see a
modest recovery over the next six quarters, and I'd say it's roughly
at the same pace as that in the Greenbook, assuming that the value of
the dollar is constant.
In the near term we expect that the main
sources of growth will be in household outlays on durables and housing
plus a switch from inventory liquidation to inventory accumulation.
And then next year we would anticipate a turnaround of business
equipment spending. We are optimistic that a moderate recovery would
be consistent with moderate declines in both the inflation rate and
the unemployment rate in the period. We also believe that there is a
chance that the dollar may drop as much as 10 percent over the next
year and a half as long-term interest rates fall and also as the U.S.
demand for imports grows.
If that were to happen, that path of the
dollar would add approximately 1/2 point to the growth rate of GNP

10/1/91

-12-

next year but also would add 1/2 point to the inflation rate by early
1993.

Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In terms of the
District, New England has changed very little since the last meeting.
In fact, a sense of resignation is beginning to accompany the
pervasive sense of gloom. Confidence at the consumer level about both
current and expected conditions continues to decline; we're in a range
that's somewhat worse than the national level. And partly as a result
of this, retailers we talk to are extremely nervous about the
Christmas season. They are going in with very light inventories;
there has been a lot of inventory liquidation so far and they are
planning on quite light ordering for Christmas.
In fact, now they're
seeing some lost sales because of not having goods on the shelf and
that's reflected also in indications that discounting has diminished
in some of these cases; but they're not about to increase their
inventories for a while. Manufacturers by and large see some bottom
but no real rebound. Again, they are very nervous, very cautious on
capital spending, and have continued plans for restructuring and
reducing employment.
There is concern in the aerospace sector, which
in our area involves feeder industries; they are particularly
concerned about what may happen to the B2 program. Actually, it's
interesting that in the District as a whole we saw a reduction in the
labor force last year of about 1 percent.
Some of that I think is
people moving out and some of it is the discouraged worker phenomenon.
In the financial sectors there is obviously a lot of
continued restructuring going on. Much of this, if not all, is very
necessary; but it obviously will have a transitional impact on the
labor market and the commercial space market.
It is an interesting
phenomenon. In the space market alone there is an enormous amount of
jockeying going on as developers who have buildings just completed or
about to come on line try to compete to steal tenants away from
competitors by knocking down lease prices quite a lot.
From the
standpoint of the economy as a whole, while this restructuring
certainly has been an important and necessary long-run phenomenon that
we don't want to stop, it does constitute a drag on the economy,
particularly as it affects many people who usually haven't been
impacted by recessions; and it affects their confidence.
Residential
real estate in the District has softened but one would expect with the
mortgage market improvement that there will be some turnaround.
Unfortunately, in what I think has to be on balance a negative report
with regard to District business activity, on the inflation side we
did have one interesting labor contract, the NYNEX contract, that will
affect to some extent at least the management of the New England
division of NYNEX. It's a fairly rich contract--about 13.2 percent
over three years.
It actually had to reverse the previous deals in
trying to [introduce] cost sharing for medical insurance where
[unintelligible] program as long as the company would pay for it
fully. This was traded off [for other concessions] and we'll see if
the productivity returns come in. Management expects that they have
gotten some significant work rule improvements, but we don't know.
And they're continuing to cut management employment.
But I think it
was really buying labor peace at what I thought was an unusual time in
the cycle.

10/1/91

-13-

As far as the national scene goes, I think it's very, very
hard to find a central tendency in the forecast that would be much
different--or one that I would have much more confidence in--than what
I find myself very much in sympathy with
the staff has produced.
I would think
Mike's views of the risks as far as the outcome goes.
that they're slightly on the down side but not greatly.
From my perspective what this comes down to, since it's all a
My own
Which side is the worst if we are wrong?
game of risks, is:
view is that I would prefer to be wrong on the side of having a little
stronger growth than somewhat weaker growth, at least in the short
run, because I am concerned about the financial sector. We have
We would be
talked about many of the [financial sector concerns].
quite a ways away from potential if the economy were to come in-instead of, say, at 3.3 percent growth, which is the central tendency
--at something like 1.8 percent rather than 4.8 percent growth. That
implies further stresses on the system--[more than if] we were to have
4.8 percent for a short period of time. As long as we're willing to
reverse course, I think that the latter could be dealt with more
easily than coming in with a very slowly growing economy.
Depending upon the state of confidence, I think we could see
a quite slow Christmas season. I admit that there are strong
offsetting risks that imply a rather evenly balanced outcome in terms
of what may happen to the economy. Again, my views are driven by
which side I would rather be wrong on, in terms of the effect of being
wrong.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, in the Chicago District at least we
seem to be in something of a steady state. Really not much has
In a comparative
changed in total context since the last meeting.
On
sense our numbers seem a little better than the national averages.
employment, for example, our numbers have shown a little less erosion
than the national numbers; excluding Michigan, which of course has its
own very obvious problems, some of the employment numbers are looking
Manufacturing activity is showing some
at least flat to up a bit.
sign of modest improvement. The steel business, for example, is
operating at a higher rate, and at least one manufacturer would
anticipate that their operating rate would go up pretty close to 100
percent by the end of October.
As has been the case all year, so much is very, very
dependent on the auto industry. And I must say at this point that I
find it awfully hard to get a grasp on what the underlying retail
The early September sales numbers are a little on
demand for cars is.
the disappointing side, but it is expected that fleet sales during the
The industry
last 10 days will boost sales for the month as whole.
obviously is hoping for a better fourth quarter and the forecasts for
sales of cars and light trucks seem to be coming in at about 13.6
million at an annual rate. But they do admit that that could be a
little on the optimistic side. Based on that sales expectation, their
production schedules for the fourth quarter have been set at levels
quite a bit higher than the fourth quarter of last year and higher
than the third quarter of this year. But, again, the caveat or the
Looking back at the third
production risk is on the down side.
quarter, of course, they had production schedules that were forecast

10/1/91

-14-

at quite a bit higher level than actually took place.
If the sales
fail to live up to expectations and production is cut back, that of
course would work back onto the suppliers. A lot of the order
increases that steel manufacturers have are based on auto production,
but these are orders that are cancelable. We're just going to have to
wait and see how all this works out in coming weeks.
In the agricultural sector, despite the drought in parts of
the District--it's particularly tough in central Indiana--and now the
early frost, production is going to come in at a reasonable level.
Corn is down just a bit from last year; soybean production is probably
down a little more. The impact in the District in terms of farm
income is nothing like what we experienced in '85 or '86 when we went
through a big correction, barring even the drought of '88. And the ag
banks do not anticipate a significant deterioration in the permanent
aspects of agricultural loans.
On the price inflation side, I must say the situation
continues to look positive. Competitive conditions are just too tight
and too tough to provide much latitude for price increases.
The steel
industry, for example, has announced a price increase for sheet steel.
They think it will stick, but major users of steel say it will not
stick and that they will be able to beat it back down. On the wage
side, there is not much change other than, I would point out, that
Caterpillar is really in a very tough negotiating stance--really a
non-negotiating stance. They anticipate a strike and final settlement
coming out of that at a very low rate--at about the settlements of
some of the other UAW contracts.
In a national context, our numbers, certainly for the third
and fourth quarters of this year, are quite similar to the Board
staff's.
But I will say that our forecast for next year is a little
lower than the staff forecast.
The main area of difference is in
personal consumption for durable items and in turn for disposable
income; our numbers are lower there as well. So, I would argue that
the staff forecast is a little on the positive side as we get into
next year. And, net, while the recovery seems to be developing along
the lines that we've been anticipating, the main question is the one
whether this recovery is going to be strong
that Ed Boehne raised:
enough to get enough of the boats off of the bottom to sustain it for
a continued period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, when we were together in August
I reported that economic activity in the Sixth District was very slow
and uneven and, unfortunately, that hasn't changed at all.
In fact,
the people that we've been talking to over the past several weeks
would describe the local economy, and to some extent the national
economy, as one that really is struggling to maintain any forward
momentum. Retailers are experiencing flat sales; they've been very
disappointed by the back-to-school season. They're also seeing, of
course, weakness in durables as is the trend around the country.
They
are very concerned about sales in the upcoming Christmas holiday
season and are not really expecting very much from that.
I would say
that confidence continues to be low. The sentiment in the District is
reflected in the general comment we get from business people:
If
we're really in a recovery, why doesn't it feel better?

-15-

10/1/91

On the other hand, industries that are in any way related to
the export side are doing a little better; and that includes, for
example, industries like chemicals and poultry processing.
Manufacturing inventories continue to be quite lean. Another positive
note is that single-family housing inventories seem to be declining,
And building activity and
though declining at a fairly slow [pace].
sales seem to be improving a little. However, in two of our major
markets, Florida and Atlanta, the momentum in housing seems to be
declining and there's some evidence that it might actually be stalling
out. Adding to the gloom generally in the area, state and local
governments have experienced revenue shortfalls and are cutting
expenditures quite stringently, with the exception of Louisiana, which
has benefited somewhat from the oil situation. There are no price
increases to be reported at all.
On the famous credit crunch side, that problem still seems to
be with us in the Sixth District. Bankers say they are willing to
make loans to creditworthy borrowers but it's pretty clear to me that
the standards for gauging credit quality are pretty stringent and
haven't changed very much over the last several weeks. So, in
summary, it seems to me that the Southeast--the Sixth District--is
experiencing activity very much like the nation as a whole, with the
same mix of strengths and weaknesses.
On the national side, we're fairly close to the Greenbook
forecast, but we do show somewhat slower growth, particularly next
year, and somewhat higher inflation. We agree that the recovery is
going to be slow; it's probably going to be pushed by manufacturing.
I'm somewhat concerned that our forecast--not only ours but forecasts
generally--have been a bit more optimistic than the reality and I hope
that upcoming forecasts will prove to be a little more realistic. But
as I look at the overall characteristics of the economy nationally
what I see is: modest growth in consumption expenditures with
households and businesses constrained by high debt levels and limited
income growth; a housing sector that's still adjusting to slower rates
of family formations--the demographic situation we've talked about; a
nonresidential market that has a three-year supply of office space;
and negative fiscal impulses at both the state and the federal levels.
When I add that up and add to it the balance sheet position of
individuals and businesses, which is retarding growth, it seems to me
that the risk is somewhat on the down side. And I would ask the same
If we're going to make a mistake in
question that Dick Syron asked:
policy, would it be better to err on the side of stimulating growth a
little more? I would tend to come out on that side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. At the national level, as has been the case for
some time, I find myself quite comfortable with the Greenbook
forecast. The latest readings on the economy and its prospects
suggest that a modest recovery is underway and I think it's likely to
continue. I would add that I'm also more confident than I have been
for some time that we are finally going to see some progress in
bringing down the core rate of inflation over the next year or two.
So, from that perspective, the outlook to me looks reasonably
satisfactory.

-16-

10/1/91

In the District, recent meetings that I've held have had a
surprisingly positive tone. But I think that's because they've been
very District-specific. By that I mean that they focused mainly on
agriculture, which for the most part is having a good year; on
tourism, which has had a good year; on residential construction, which
in parts of the District at least is doing surprisingly well; and on
retail sales, which have been boosted substantially by Canadian
shoppers apparently flooding across the border and stimulating
activity all across the northern tier. So, from those perspectives,
things really look quite positive. On the other hand, if I talk to
business people whose businesses are more diverse geographically and
who do business nationally and internationally, attitudes really are
terrible. I've been trying to understand why, without a lot of
success, because I don't think the aggregate data that we look at are
as bad as the attitudes would suggest.
Part of the explanation may be
that business people simply expect, and indeed want, stronger and more
rapid improvement in activity than they are experiencing. Part of it
may be the pricing situation; my general impression is that it would
be very difficult these days really to get any kind of price increases
at all. And that may be affecting them, of course, both directly and
through the profit side of the business.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Ed Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Except for manufacturing, there are few signs of
growth in the middle Atlantic states. There's continued weakness in
the labor markets and joblessness--the number of people who are out of
work--is still rising. The word from the retailers in the District,
and the statistics do back it up, is that retail sales are fairly
flat, with not much expectation of a Christmas season that they will
feel comfortable about. The banks and the financial sector generally
are still quite sluggish and the overhang of commercial real estate is
still there and will be there for some time. On the whole I sense
that the District is somewhat weaker than the nation and attitudes are
at best cautious.
As far as the national economy goes, I hope the Greenbook is
right. I always feel better when I hear Mike. The trouble is that
when I get back home, it doesn't last long; it's a quick fix and I
need more of it to overcome what I keep running into. But I think the
risks are on the down side both for growth and for inflation. And
then I ask myself the question that Dick raised earlier:
If we
miscalculate, nine months or a year from now which miscalculation
would we rather have? If this incipient recovery should slip away
from us--though I don't happen to think it will--I think it would be
very difficult for us to rev it up again. I would prefer to try to
slow down a faster recovery than to try to speed up one that isn't
moving along. So, I think the risks are on the down side and the
costs of the downside risks are higher than coming out on the up side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I think it's time to remember that we are 28
months into this period of declining short-term interest rates. The
fed funds rate is 465 basis points lower than it was 28 months ago.
This was accompanied, of course, eventually by a shift from a flat
yield curve to a very positive yield curve. That very positive yield
curve has been in place for quite a few months. We're looking, then,

-17-

10/1/91

at a shift in behavior in the commercial banking system as well as the
nonbank public in regard to their positioning of assets.
The
commercial banking system is shifting heavily into U.S. government

securities. This is quite typical at this stage of the interest rate
cycle that we're in. Undoubtedly, when commercial banks begin at the
margin to add to their holdings of government securities and to offset
that by some shrinkage or no growth in loans that, of course, means
that the opportunity costs of making a new loan are moving in the
direction of alleviating the credit crunch. So, it seems to me that
we have fully in place the atmosphere that does provide for the kind
of forecast that Mike has described. To me the one factor that was
most noticeable in Mike's statement was that the Blue Chip forecasters
have a slightly lower rate of economic growth but a slightly higher
rate of inflation. And I guess, Mike, that maybe we have inside
information. But the critical question before us puts me somewhat in
disagreement with those who talk about where the risks are. The
critical risk that we run at this stage is that we do not make the
gradual progress in the core rate of inflation as Mike has outlined.
And if we go past this window and find ourselves with the same basic
core rate of inflation we've had since 1984, you can better believe
that we will pay for that yield structure and the term structure of
interest rates in the future, and that certainly will be a very
significant factor with regard to the size of the U.S. government debt
and the interest payments that will be there.
So, I feel that where we are is just about right. I don't
see how it could be much better. It seems to me that it would be
better for us to have 2-1/2 percent real growth rather than 3-1/2
percent real growth and make the progress in [reducing] the core rate
of inflation. The environment that we're in, if we maintain it, came
after a period of patience, which may mean that the rate of inflation,
and the rate of [unintelligible] may come down more in the next 12
months. Yet we're looking immediately at financial markets that [have
yet] to adjust to news in regard to what we think the third-quarter
GNP numbers are going to be. It's entirely possible that given those
numbers--[growth in] real GNP in the third quarter at the 3 percent
level--that we could see the long bond yields rising above this nice
So, we have in front of us
7.79 percent where they now appear to be.
a very delicate matter. And it seems to me that the best prospects
for growth will rest with further progress in [lowering] the core rate
of inflation. So, I'm very pleased, but I would be happy to have Mike
be 1/2 point too high on this real GNP number.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. The economy in the Dallas District, Mr.
Chairman, has improved somewhat since the last FOMC meeting. Over the
summer we experienced some employment gains, after about five months
of no gains. District manufacturing activity has gone along with the
nation in being stronger than the services areas. The strongest part
of manufacturing has been in chemicals, petroleum refining, plastics,
and also some construction-related manufacturing. Construction has
picked up slightly in residential areas but not in nonresidential
areas. The energy sector remains weak primarily because of the
prolonged decline in natural gas prices. Rig counts in the District
are down about 5 percent in the last month and down 21 percent over
the past year. Retail sales have languished in recent weeks and
remain well below year-ago levels. Our directors and other people we

10/1/91

-18-

talk to and get anecdotal information from have the feeling that we're
stuck in the mud--that forward progress is not necessarily being
sustained. They're still very concerned with what is going on with
bank lending and they're concerned about the sectors of the economy--

the small business and medium size business sectors--that are still
relying heavily on the banking industry as opposed to someone else for
their financing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. Well, I'm pleased to be here with you again.
Several of you commented that you'd rather see Lee at this chair than
me and I agree with that; I certainly would.
Nevertheless, in our

District we are cautiously optimistic about prospects for further
gains in output as inventory cutbacks near an end.

Our District

contacts tell us that they're reasonably satisfied that retail stocks
are at about the desired levels. Manufacturers, especially of motor
vehicles, steel, and major appliances, have for the most part cleared
their inventories. We also see scattered signs of a comeback in
capital goods out there. Several industry sources believe that their
business is either near a trough or in the early stages of recovery.
This is especially the case with producers of industrial equipment,
industrial controls, heavy duty trucks, small electric motors,
electrical equipment, and ball bearings. But I would hasten to add
that the recovery in our District is not yet broad-based or very
strong. Our directors do not yet see much of a recovery but their
attitudes may be based more on year-to-year comparisons or on their
memories of pre-recession operating rates, when they expected to be at
85 percent or more [of capacity].
Still, we feel that the latest
purchasing agents reports confirm that manufacturing has been in an
expanding phase in recent months; and that should continue, albeit
less rapidly than many would want. That concludes my remarks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, recent public attention has been
focused on the banking sector being the skunk at the garden party,
which is restraining more vigorous growth in the economy. I have a
somewhat different view. I believe that the credit crunch isn't [the
issue].
I believe it's not so much that banks are not lending as it
is that borrowers are not borrowing. It is true that bankers'
confidence has been badly shaken by savage examination experience, a
slack economy, and stiffer capital requirements; but they can hardly
abandon their basic business, which is lending money. I think the
anecdotal evidence favors the conclusion that it is weak demand rather
than lender reluctance that accounts for the credit contraction.
Consumer confidence and business sector confidence are weak and are
not likely to be stimulated by further interest rate changes. Some
solid good news about the economy is far more likely to stimulate
demand than a 25 or 50 basis point cut in the fed funds rate. I hope
we don't lose patience with the pace of recovery if we have confidence
in the staff analysis, and I do.
In the past, we have had a tendency
to ease too much and too long; and I hope this time that we can keep
our eye on the target of price stability and not over-stimulate the
economy.
waffle!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Vice Chairman.

Well, John, I'm glad you liked the

10/1/91

-19-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is going to sound as if it was
orchestrated, but it was not. Amid all these anecdotal reports,
Gary's people must be sending the people in Minneapolis to talk to me
because I hear all this terrible stuff too. But staff at the Bank
yesterday were walking me through some [analysis] on the household
Some of it Mike
sector, which actually made me feel a little better.
already referred to and indirectly John referred to it. We all have
this impression that the saving rate is very low, that income growth
is rather sluggish, and that spending is rather sluggish. But if you
look at it in the context of these NBER charts, you find several
things. One is that the saving rate never falls in the beginning of a
recovery. What that means, of course, is that it is income that
pushes up spending, not the saving rate falling. And when you look at
the income side in this recovery, it's sluggish but certainly not
I think that was part of what Mike was saying
disastrously so.
before. And neither for that matter is overall consumption spending
or even so-called discretionary consumption spending all that wildly
out of line with what one might expect. On the other hand,
nonagricultural employment is a bit weaker, but interestingly enough
It's
that is not in manufacturing; it's not even in construction.
basically all in services, with particular emphasis on finance,
insurance, and real estate, and in state and local governments. And,
of course, those problems are as much secular as they are cyclical.
What that basically says is that if you look at the dynamics of the
consumer sector in the context of income, employment, and savings,
despite the fact that nobody feels very good, it's not all that
unusual looking.
There's another side to it, which gets to John LaWare's point
that I found even more interesting. And that is what has been
happening to the household balance sheet. When you look at that
household balance sheet in flow-of-funds terms, what you find is that
the contraction in the growth of household debt doesn't look all that
unusual either. The only thing that's unusual is that it started a
little earlier than it normally does and that the fall in the growth
rate of non-mortgage debt started distinctly earlier and has been much
steeper. But that probably reflects the 1986 Tax Act as much as
anything else. But as the rate of growth of debt falls, if you
believe in a balance sheet, something else must happen. And of course
when you look at the last four or five years as a whole, the saving
Therefore, what we
rate on balance hasn't really changed at all.
find, which isn't surprising, is that over that period the growth in
the acquisition of financial assets and the acquisition or increase in
And that, of course, makes the
liabilities are very, very similar.
But it turns out--and this
overall situation look even more typical.
is the thing I didn't really have a clue on--that there is one very
big difference in terms of the financial assets side of the household
balance sheet over this four-to-five year period, and that is a very
large atypical shift in the composition of household financial assets
out of bank deposits into various securities-type instruments,
including government securities funds and so on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The financial funds.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, even the mutual funds are a
part of it, but it's also the government funds.
Now, that big
relative drop in bank deposits, of course, we see in the context of
the rate of growth in the money supply. But if you think of it in

-20-

10/1/91

this broader context, it seems to me that the pattern as a whole is
quite consistent with the hypothesis that it's being driven
importantly by the desire to shed debt, which is quite consistent with
John's point about the demand side of the equation being more
important than the supply side.
Indeed, it's also quite consistent
with the hypothesis that the portfolio shift phenomenon, which in part
is being facilitated by technology, may have an important role here as
well.
Now, the reason why that makes me feel a little better in the
context of the earlier comments about income, consumption, the saving
rate and so on is that, to the extent it is significantly driven by
purposeful decisions to manage the balance sheet better and shed debt,
it also makes me at least less nervous--I'm still nervous--about the
money supply and about the credit crunch. That's not to say that I
think I understand the money supply and it's not to say that there are
not elements of the credit crunch there; it's simply to say that it
makes me feel a little better about them and therefore a little more
comfortable with the kind of forecast that Mike has on the table.
I'd quickly add, Mr. Chairman, on the anecdotal side, that
the attitudes one hears about, especially from big businesses, are
still lousy. The only other thing--I don't remember if I mentioned
this at the last meeting or not--is that I do get the sense that the
commercial real estate market in price terms may be bottoming out, at
least in the greater New York metropolitan area.
There's still going
to be a long workout, but one does begin to get the feel that the
precipitous-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Commercial and not

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
prices flattening?

That's

residential?

right.

You're talking now about the rental

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Sale prices.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sale prices are flattening, which means
that the rental prices are flattening?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
Now, that's still in the
straw-in-the-wind category, but I now have had enough people say that
to me that I can't dismiss it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. New York was the leader in going
downhill in certain respects.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's not just the City.
I get
this now from northern Jersey too, anyway. Ed, I don't know what
they're saying in southern Jersey, but certainly in northern Jersey-MR. BOEHNE. Northern Jersey has more excess than south
Jersey. But Jerry's point is that probably in relative terms there's
more excess space in the suburban areas than in the central cities.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Bob, what is your judgment of commercial
real estate price trends in the last month?
MR. PARRY.

That they're weak and probably have come down.

10/1/91

-21-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Does anyone else sense this?

I sense that rental prices are still coming down
MR. BOEHNE.
but that sale prices in the Philadelphia area are in the process of
flattening out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

Commercial?

Commercial buildings.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The relevant rental prices are the new
lease rental prices because the average is going to come down for a
long period.
MR. BOEHNE.

The new lease prices are still very weak.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Have you seen anything, Dick?

I think the new lease prices have weakened but
MR. SYRON.
are stabilizing. We have levels that are substantially below what
they were before but I think that they are reaching-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

Bob, is there anything in Texas?

I don't think there's a lot of activity there.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
developments?
MR. FORRESTAL.

Does anybody else have any sense of

Rental prices are still weak in the Atlanta

area.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They have to start somewhere.

They
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Look, don't misunderstand me.
are weak in New York. But what I'm saying is that they appear to be-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The rate of decline is

[abating]?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that's clear. The rate of
decline has abated, but my impression is that it is beginning to sound
as though people think it may be bottoming out.
MR. SYRON.
It's different in suburban areas and the central
In Boston, where obviously it occurred earlier than in some
city.
other places, the class A space seems now to be going for $21-$22 and
that hasn't changed much, I would say, over the summer.
MR. LAWARE.
MR. SYRON.

It's half of where it was four years ago.
That's right.

MR. PARRY. I think the weakness in prices and its
continuation are broadly consistent with the forecast. If you had
these prices bottoming out now and presumably moving up in the next
quarter or so, maybe you would have your [projected] decline in
nonresidential construction and maybe within that the commercial
But to the extent that that forecast is
[sector] coming to an end.

10/1/91

-22-

correct, I would anticipate considerable weakness in prices in the
months and quarters ahead.
MR. SYRON. Well, a lot of leases are rolling over and the
average is obviously coming down because people are very aggressively
going out and seeking to steal tenants. There are a lot of places
where that is going on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
this and make your report?

Tom Melzer, do you want to comment on

MR. MELZER. I don't have any comments on that particular
In terms of the District in general, I would say the
subject.
numbers, which are necessarily somewhat stale at this point, would
indicate that maybe we're at the beginning of a turnaround. I have
been reporting overall employment declines. We have had pretty
healthy growth in manufacturing employment in the most recent threemonth period and a seeming cessation in the decline in
nonmanufacturing employment, and both residential and nonresidential
construction contracts are growing at pretty healthy rates.
Anecdotally, I picked up a somewhat different tone. What I've been
hearing, particularly from our board of directors, over a long period
of time is that things are just moving along at a slow pace without
any significant declines.
We were in a couple of different parts of the District last
week, and particularly in Evansville I picked up some very positive
comments. They all seem to go back to roughly midyear; they talked
about a very lousy first half of the year. One fellow who supplies
automobile parts is running [his production facilities] seven days a
week and has record shipments. Another in electronic components has
increasing orders. There is some talk of capital expenditures in the
industrial area there. A lot of people are looking all of a sudden to
relocate. It's not new construction; it will be relocated
manufacturing facilities. But the observation was that people don't
even look if they're not somewhat constructive, and there's a lot
going on there. In general, I would say this is mostly manufacturingdriven, just given the people we had in the room from that general
area.
In another area where the economy isn't performing so well,
Mt. Vernon, Illinois, there was a lot of talk about credit
availability. But in general I think there was a recognition that a
rebuilding of balance sheets needed to take place. One thing that
surprised me is that no one really attacked [the Federal Reserve] in
"You've got to
terms of interest rates. In other words, no one said:
do something about interest rates." Now, I think if you're in areas
such as Boston and the West Coast, where maybe there's a lot of real
estate hung up, that interest rate pressure is still there. But in
these areas there's just a general feeling that rates are not the
issue. And I would say, picking up on John LaWare's point about the
credit crunch, that our aggregate banking data for the District
continue through midyear to show no increase in nonperforming loans;
we're at roughly the same level we were at the end of last year, with
less than 2 percent in nonperforming loans and yet no loan growth.
So, this should be a group of bankers that isn't as shell-shocked as
some others; and loans aren't growing.

-23-

10/1/91

On the national situation, I'm comfortable with the Board
staff's forecast.
I would make at least four observations.
First of
all, I personally don't think monetary policy is inconsistent with
recovery and expansion; I think it has been consistent with that for
some time. Secondly, I'm very skeptical about our ability to finetune the real side. So, the concept that we can somehow buy more
insurance bothers me.
I just don't think we'd be good enough to cash
in that insurance, or however you want to describe it, when we need
to. And in that connection, I think there's a good deal of monetary
stimulus in train, as Wayne pointed out--whether you look at what has
happened to interest rates and in particular short-term real interest
rates or whether you look, as we would be more inclined to do, at the
behavior of narrow money or reserves over a period of time. There's a
good deal of stimulus in the pipeline and I don't think it has all
In fact, and this would be my final point, our view is
shown through.
that if we were to continue this rate of narrow money growth for a
sustained period of time, we're probably already risking a somewhat
higher inflation rate than the 3 to 4 percent that we're talking about
achieving in the forecast period down the road.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that what we've all
been talking about this morning and what is at the front of all our
minds is a very straightforward question with a very ambiguous answer.
If we knew the
Is this economy faltering or is it going to falter?
answer to that question, we'd have a pretty good idea of what to do
about policy. The staff forecast is that it's not faltering and is
not going to.
But I think the staff and everyone else would agree
that the question is very much outstanding.
I would certainly concur
with those who say--and I've said here before--that the consequences
of a falter are very severe. And we have to keep that very much in
mind and be very concerned about it.
But it seems to me as we ponder
policy right now that we have to keep in mind the fact that we have a
Staff
good deal more stimulus coming from what has already been done.
studies have indicated that the stimulus that we're going to get from
easing actions to date is going to peak in late '91 and the first half
of '92.
The major part of it is still ahead of us. We all know how
Wayne Angell mentioned 450 plus basis
much rates have come down.
The aggregates may be beginning to
points in the last 28 months.
move; it is very tentative yet.
But I think one can make the case
perhaps for this sticker shock and that the portfolio shifts are
beginning to abate and may be in the course of beginning to move a
little, which will help the aggregates. We just had a drop in the
prime rate. Mortgages just went under 9 percent for the first time in
a long time. Yields on long-term Treasury securities just went under
It seems to me that
8 percent. There's some help still on the way.
policy help right now, to the extent that it can be provided and is
needed for the economy, may be to reinforce the downward trend in long
rates. We have an incipient view now that inflation is going to
improve, and we need to encourage that.
It seems to me that the best
way to do that would be to try to see if we can't hold short rates for
the moment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I don't have much to add on the real economy.
We expected a moderate recovery and we're getting no better than that.

10/1/91

-24-

There still is some sense that it hasn't really taken root, although
the evidence is pretty clear that we're getting a manufacturing
rebound.
I had some sense from the anecdotal evidence that this
recovery may have lost some of its steam in late summer. That
certainly happened in the housing area, but--as both Mikes mentioned-the recent retreat of mortgage rates might rekindle that faint flame.
Consumer spending appears to be holding up, again growing with
moderate growth in income. From the real side what concerns me is
that after this manufacturing recovery and the inventory side of it,
it remains difficult to identify the sources of final demand that are
going to move the economy forward. The government sector remains
bleak. Perhaps we can expect an uptick in business spending next
year; attitudes are not too encouraging, but they never are.
And on
the consumer side, consumers can only spend at the modest rate of
income growth.
So, I think the final demand side late this year and
early next year is a concern.
On the financial side, I still see some weakness.
It's true
that the public capital markets, the investment grade sector, look
fine. As the long bond rate has come down, bond issuance has picked
up smartly. The stock market has been marking time for six months
now; still, we're getting a fairly healthy volume of new stock issues.
For below investment grade businesses--small and medium-size firms,
which are the growth sector of the economy--I still think conditions
are [poor].
Demand is certainly weak; at some stage demand should be
picking up.
I wonder why we hear so much about credit constraints if
they're not out there. In the beginning, I thought it was commercial
real estate developers; I would assume by now most of them are broke
and not able to complain! The jury is still out on the capacity of
the system to satisfy loan demand should it ever arrive because I
think banks are focusing on increasing capital, working out problem
loans, and rationalizing operations with mergers.
One way I would
[phrase] the question confronting us on the financial side of the
economy is:
Are monetary conditions tight or easy?
You can pick your
indicators here. M2 conditions look tight, with unprecedentedly slow
growth in M2. We've discussed some of the issues there. What would
concern me most is the credit side and less so the portfolio side.
Ml
growth continues to look healthy; maybe it has tailed off a bit, but
it continues to look healthy. We have little confidence that M1 is
related reliably to economic activity. Some would suggest even that
the reliability of the M2 relationship could be called into question.
Look at credit growth. Conditions also look tight; but, again, that
could be demand.
If you look at interest rates, we've brought shortterm rates down substantially, as has been mentioned, and that looks
like ease. Of course, it's real rates that matter and with CPI
inflation of 5-1/2 percent in 1990 and looking at perhaps 3-1/2
percent in 1992, real rates have fallen less over this last year than
nominal rates.
So, there has been less ease than would be apparent
just looking at the rates. Real Treasury bill rates are higher than
they have averaged over the long sweep of history. Over 60 years the
real T-bill rate has been zero.
Currently, it's probably 1-1/2 or 2
percent, although it is probably marginally lower now than the rate
that prevailed over much of the '80s.
It's roughly in the same order
of magnitude as the '80s; of course, the '80s was a different
environment, characterized by growth in credit demand.
If you're interested in stimulus to final demand, you might
look at real rates paid by final borrowers; perhaps they matter.
If

10/1/91

-25-

you think of real rates faced by bank borrowers, they would still seem
to be pretty high. As Chairman Riegle pointed out the other day, the
last time the discount rate was 5 percent, the prime rate was 6
percent, not 8 percent as it is now. It is true that over the last
year the federal funds rate has fallen 300 basis points; the prime
rate has fallen only 200 basis points in nominal terms; and the real
With respect to real consumer bank
prime rate has fallen even less.
rates, I would suspect that we've had little, if any, easing in those
rates; maybe they've come off in nominal terms a bit, but I doubt if
we've seen much easing in those rates in real terms. And it's not
clear why we should expect much stimulus from that source. So, it
does seem to me that the financial system is inherently tight
currently and is not transmitting our easing actions fully through to
I think one sees this if one looks at money growth,
final borrowers.
credit growth, or real rates, which for many borrowers still appear
high.
We are concerned about flagging final demand out there in a
It could be that in this environment we may need
couple of quarters.
to offset some of this inherent tightness; and lower rates may be
necessary for the ease to show through to final borrowers and produce
I
the stimulus we would normally expect from our actions thus far.
realize this argument applies most forcefully only to a segment of the
the banking system, and perhaps insurance companies
financial system:
in an institutional system. However, those without access to the
capital markets do constitute a significant sector of the economy in
terms of size and I think in importance in terms of stimulated growth.
And even in the capital markets, we must recognize that real rates
I would also mention
have fallen less than nominal rates.
parenthetically here the point that Mike Prell made based upon Ted
Truman's work:
that the rise in the dollar this year has also offset
I wonder just how
much of the apparent ease. So, the bottom line is:
I fear that it might be tighter than we
stimulative policy has been.
I also feel that at the current stage we continue to
have intended.
receive data consistent with weak recovery. We've made a couple of
moves in the last six weeks and these have been well received by the
long bond market and precipitated the reduction in the prime rate.
So, it may be wise to continue to assess developing responses to these
actions before moving again.
I hesitate in part because I wouldn't
like to miss that opportunity that Governor Angell mentioned. I do
think, though, that if the economy sinks into recession early next
year, that would not be helpful to pursuing our ultimate goals.
So, I
do see risks in waiting too long for the financial system to ease on
its own. We may need to do more to offset what I see as an inherent
tightness, if we're concerned about this issue of the level of final
demand later this year and early next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
want to make any comment?
MR. HOENIG.

Anything further?

Does anybody else

Mr. Chairman, do you want to hear from our

District?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, I did, but I didn't want to push

you, Tom.

MR. HOENIG.

I appreciate that.

-26-

10/1/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I thought you might just like to sit

here and listen for the first time.

MR. HOENIG. I might just make a couple of comments that
might be of some value.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOENIG.

Please do.

Our District economy has been growing fairly

modestly, and I think it's particularly important that this has
happened in the manufacturing area as well. Our automobile
manufacturers are operating at capacity. And while our aircraft
industry, which is important in parts of our District, had a downturn
in the first half, it is anticipating some recovery, which is good
news for us. I might mention that residential construction activity
in our area has been picking up, but nonresidential has continued to
languish, although not as seriously as in other parts of the country.
I might even mention that in Denver, although there's not a lot of
activity, there is an appearance that lease rates are firming up and
that is important to us.
In agriculture, the situation is very similar to what you've
heard here. There is some strengthening in crop prices but cattle
prices have been falling fairly importantly and we anticipate about a
10 percent decline in agricultural income in our part of the country.
Energy also is weak, particularly in the natural gas area. It has
been very harmful to our Oklahoma area where prices have been down and
therefore rig activity has been falling as well.
On the national economy, I would like to mention that our
analysis is, like others, very similar to what is in the Greenbook.
We are a little more pessimistic in the consumption area and net
exports but a little more optimistic on the investment side. We think
it might be even stronger if long-term rates were to continue to come
down. We are also in agreement with the projections on inflation
being less than 4 percent. We think that's a very important focus as
we go forward because that will help long-term rates to come down and
that will have a much more important stimulus on the national economy.
So with that, Mr. Chairman, I'll make my remarks short. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thanks, Tom.

Why don't we break for

coffee?
[Coffee break]
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.
errors treated?
MR. KOHN.

Questions for Don?

The forecast of M2 is adjusted; how are the
Well, judgmentally.

MR. PARRY. In other words, using the model, we would have
gotten numbers significantly higher than in the Bluebook?
MR. KOHN.

From here on out you mean?

-27-

10/1/91

MR. PARRY.
MR. KOHN.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.
Yes, about 3 percentage points higher.
Okay, so in effect you're saying--

MR, KOHN. The growth rates we'd be seeing would be more like
6 percent than 3 percent.
MR. PARRY.

Do the errors deteriorate or are you basically--?

MR. KOHN. Yes, we have smaller errors in the fourth quarter
than we had in the third, but the errors are still substantial--on the
order of 3 percentage points.
In the third quarter we had an error in
our model of 6-1/2 percentage points.
MR. PARRY.

Okay.

MR. KOHN. Our projection is that whatever mysterious forces
were causing that will abate, in part because people with MMDAs,
savings deposits, or other deposits have had a chance to reallocate
their portfolios.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further questions for Don?
If not, why
don't I get started. We have a very unusual set of problems, but the
least difficult strikes me as in the area of policy. The reason I say
that is that at this stage we seem to be treading what in retrospect
is very likely to turn out to have been the right path. If we go back
historically, as Jerry and a number of others have in this discussion,
what is clearly happening is a long-term phenomenon where in the first
half of the 1980s, in part as the result of the 1981 Tax Act, we
created an extraordinary expansion of credit. The grossing up in the
flow-of-funds sense of both the funds raised per dollar of nominal GNP
and the degree of intermediation were all fairly extensive. There was
a really major financial expansion. It finally petered out somewhat
in the middle part of the 1980s and then got really dragooned with the
1986 Tax Act, which took away all of the real estate incentives that
had been the major spark that had engendered the credit expansion.
Since that period we have had the grossing coming down
dramatically; by the grossing I mean the types of activities in which
state and local governments borrowed at the [tax exempt interest]
rate, invested at the Treasury rate, and picked up a guaranteed rate
of return. There was a lot of that going on. I'm talking about the
very large amount of borrowing against realized capital gains and the
sale of existing loans, which built up the balance sheet.
The whole
thing was really quite explosive, and all of that is now in the
process of turning around and, in fact, has been turning around for
the last four years.
It is not something that disturbed us
particularly until it began to fall into the money supply area.
This may be premature, and I suspect it is a little
premature, but I think what is occurring is that we're beginning to
find that if past relationships on M2 were in place--or as Don likes
to say "in train"--we probably would have a much weaker economy right
now than is currently the case. Now, that's a very tentative
statement because we really don't have enough evidence.
But if one
were to look back from, say, February 1992 and ask "How does this all

10/1/91

-28-

look?" I have the impression that the hypothesis that Don raised may
have some validity:
namely, that the S&L evaporation has more to do
with the money weakness than I think we realize.
In principle, we
have always argued that M2 was determined essentially by the choices
of the holders, which means in effect that from where the supply comes
is irrelevant. And our general view about the liquidation that was
occurring with respect to the resolutions from the RTC was essentially
that all that money was going into other intermediary places and to a
degree in commercial banks and was leaving M2 fundamentally unchanged.
I think the proposition that M2 is mainly demand determined and
perhaps Ml even more so really is questionable; it is by no means
clear that the proposition that M2 is all [demand] determined makes
any sense. And indeed with the size of the contraction of the S&Ls,
it probably shouldn't be a surprise for us that we're getting as much
Why not
What is surprising is why now?
of a contraction as we are.
earlier?
And that raises the question as to how quickly people
adjust. As I was mentioning to Don a while back, I remember how long
it took a decade ago for the 5 percent passbook accounts to disappear.
People just sat there with 5 percent when they could have gotten twice
But it's fairly
that and more; it took a long while to unravel.
apparent that when you shake somebody and say "Look!" they change.
And when you have an S&L resolution, people [reset] their views as to
where they should be relative to the types of holdings they have.
I
This
think that's what is probably going to turn out to be the case.
again raises as a hypothesis that when we look back in six months or
thereabouts I suspect we will be looking at what really was a
fundamental change going on in the structure of finance.
I think that the real economy, if one could measure it in
terms of whether it is good or bad, is really not bad. Productivity
has increased significantly in the manufacturing area over the years.
I would suspect, although the evidence is difficult to come by, that
profitability at any given rate of operation tends to be higher; that
there is a great deal more competitive capability in the American
business system than there was a while back; and that what we are
running into is a deficiency--basically in this case the intermediary
system. It surely is not in the area of bond issuance.
[unintelligible], as a number of you told me the other day, indicated
is that the total investment banking
that the view at
industry was operating at capacity and that if there is any more
issuance coming out in stocks or bonds their "due diligence" would
begin to break down. We're seeing an extraordinary [volume of]
financing going on in the larger companies, but we are seeing a really
I'm
extraordinary pulling back in the depository institutions.
I
somewhat less inclined to take the view that John LaWare has taken.
I'm not
think there is a supply side effect from the capital side.
sure how it's going to be resolved but it's probably the 1980s that
were off, not the 1990s.
All in all, I think what we have here is that the grossing
The general
that went on throughout the '80s has come back to normal.
net funds raised is far closer to normal, but we have a really hobbled
intermediary system, which is not only the S&Ls and commercial banks
but clearly the insurance companies as well. Were it not for the fact
of a weakened intermediary system's effects on primary borrowings, one
could argue that we'll finance the economy outside the intermediary
system. But it doesn't work that way. And what I think we are
seeing, as I put it to my friends at the White House the other day, is

-29-

10/1/91

that it's very much as though an economy which is picking up steam is
running against a 50 mile an hour head wind. My impression is that
we'll make it through, but it will be a struggle.
Having said all of this, I think we're getting some evidence
that the commercial banking problems are not getting worse. We're
getting some indications that we have passed the worst in the S&L
situation; we still have insurance problems but they're not getting
worse. So, the question at this stage is:
Can we get through the
next several months? My suspicion is--and I would buy the staff's
forecast on this--that we probably will. And if that is the case,
what we are testing right now is a major hypothesis as to whether the
money supply contraction that we are seeing really matters or whether
we are seeing an economy hobbling along with insufficient finance that
nonetheless will be able to make it.
If that is in fact the case, we
will look in retrospect and say, rightly or wrongly, that we probably
have the optimum policy that one could conceive of, granted the types
of problems that exist.
Now, having said all that, we're not in February looking back
at something which looks as though it has been cured; we're not there
yet.
And I would be inclined at this stage to tread very cautiously,
as I think we've done.
I'd rush nowhere quickly. And that would lead
me to conclude that policy should be somewhere between symmetric and
asymmetric toward ease, but I'd be less inclined to move unless we
begin to see further deterioration.
If the staff forecast is right,
and if this hypothesis about money that Don has raised is right--and I
think it is becoming increasingly more reasonable--then we should
begin to see some strengthening in the data within the next six weeks.
If it fails and fails in an obvious way, it is telling us that this
hypothesis is not correct and would lead one more toward the type of
hypothesis that Governor Mullins raises.
I would recommend a
directive--although I personally would feel comfortable either with
symmetric or asymmetric toward ease--that is more toward the latter
because it's hard for me at this stage to envisage that we might
tighten within the next six weeks.
Finally, let me say that irrespective of what is going on, I
think we are going to have some tough public relations difficulties on
the Hill, not only with the issue of Salomon but with this whole
problem of a sluggish economy. An economist's view is that a
recession is over when the economy stops receding; and that by
definition is the low point of a cycle, the worst point of a cycle.
Politicians believe the recession is over when the economy has
recovered fully. And we're going to be in this dilemma, as far as I'm
concerned, for a goodly number of months.
But if the staff is right
on the forecast--.
So far things are falling into place even if the
anecdotal evidence doesn't work, and I think we may well come out in
that area.
In any event, I spoke longer than I intended to but I'd
like to put on the table as a general suggestion "mildly asymmetric
toward ease," if one can characterize a directive in those terms.
MR, BLACK.
Is that "B" mildly asymmetrical toward ease or
"A" mildly asymmetrical?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLACK.

It's "B."

"B."

-30-

10/1/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I frankly would not expect us to ease
right here. We could well ease; and if that happens, we might find
that the economy turns around a lot faster than we now expect.
President Parry.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, as you indicated, the economy does
appear to be recovering from the recession; at the current level of
the funds rate, the forecast for moderate growth along with some gains
against inflation certainly seems reasonable.
I also think that the
downside risk in the outlook has been addressed by the recent decline
in interest rates.
Consequently, I would certainly support the idea
that we leave policy unchanged at this time, and I must admit a slight
preference myself for a symmetric policy here.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, while I said earlier and I
still continue to believe that the risk is on the down side, I
certainly hope your forecast for our looking back from February and
saying our policy has been right is correct.
I'm still rather nervous
about where we are, but I would certainly at this point support your
prescription for no change with an asymmetric directive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

"B" mildly symmetric sounds fine to

me.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mildly asymmetric?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
adjectives in these things!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Asymmetric.

There are too many

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I come out right where you do but I
really do feel a great loss in seeing M2 lose its meaning. I feel
almost like a baby who has lost his pacifier!
[Laughter]
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. BLACK.

Well, Bob, you adjusted when you lost Ml.
It took a while!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Governor LaWare.

I favor "B" but with symmetric language, please.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.

"B" asymmetric.

MR. MELZER.

Which way, Ed?

MR. BOEHNE.

I imagine we ought to have little ambiguity!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Laughter]

Governor Angell.

10/1/91

-31-

MR. ANGELL. I prefer "B" symmetric but I like "mildly"
better than straight asymmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KEEHN.

"B"

asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SYRON.

"B"

"B"

Governor Kelley.

asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.

President Syron.

asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

President Keehn.

President Melzer.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

First Vice President Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. We still have some concern over the continued
weak behavior of M2, so ideally what we'd like is a directive between
"A" and "B" with an early reduction of 25 basis points in the funds
rate as reports perhaps unfold in the next week or two.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

"B"

asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.

"B"

We're still missing Governor Mullins.

asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. HOENIG.

President Stern.

"B" asymmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

President McTeer.

And President Hoenig.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I read it, I guess it falls between
But there is a majority for asymmetric
asymmetric and symmetric "B."
If we use in the
by several, so I think that [unintelligble.]
directive "slightly" rather than "somewhat," I think that probably
captures the sentiment. Would the Secretary read the directive?
MR. ANGELL.

I was on edge wondering how you were going to do

that!
"In the implementation of policy for the
MR, BERNARD.
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions. Depending upon progress toward
price stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of the
monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domestic
financial markets, slightly greater reserve restraint might or
slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the

10/1/91

intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected
to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from
September through December at annual rates of about 3 and 1-1/2
percent, respectively."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Will you call the roll?

MR. BERNARD
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
President Parry
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BERNARD.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Okay, the next meeting is November--

Five.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. November 5th. We have a need to have a
very short Board meeting before lunch.
So, if the Board members would
just stay here and others would give us a few minutes to have a legal
meeting, we'll be back at lunch.
END OF MEETING

