Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
December 17, 1991

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, December 17, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Lindsey
Mullins
Parry
Phillips

Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron. Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Lindsey, Promisel, Scheld,
Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, and
Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Hendricks, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of Cleveland
Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Messrs. Lang,
Rolnick. and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City,
New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas,
respectively
Messrs. Frydl, Goodfriend, and McNees, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Richmond, and
Boston, respectively
Mr. Belongia, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis
Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee meeting of
December 17, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Before we get started with our agenda,
I'd like to welcome our two new Board members to their first FOMC
meeting.
I trust it will be both interesting and inspiring; I can
pretty much guarantee the first.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, there may be some people who still
entertain doubts that Governor Lindsey is actually from the Fifth
District, but he is wearing the Thomas Jefferson tie.
If you can
arrange it, I think it would be good if you would call Terry Sandford
and tell him you'd like him to come over and meet him; he would
recognize the tie!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Would somebody like to move the minutes
of the previous meeting on November 5th?
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Gretchen Greene,
would you bring us up to date on the Foreign Desk?
MS. GREENE.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there questions for Ms. Greene?
If
not, would somebody like to move the [amendment to the reciprocal
currency arrangement with the Netherlands Bank] that was requested?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

I'll move it.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Without objection.

Would you continue?

MS. GREENE.
I would like now to report to you on our
discussions with the Bundesbank regarding the possibility of altering
the double-forward investment facility provided for the investment of
the bulk of the U.S. authorities' German mark reserves.
[Continuation
of statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Gretchen?
Would somebody like to move [the ratification of the transactions in
foreign currencies during the intermeeting period]?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

I'll move it.

Is there a second?

12/17/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
Peter Sternlight on the Domestic Desk.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Thank you very much.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Peter?

MR. BOEHNE. What is the status of the notion that the
Treasury would rely less on long-term bonds?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Secretary Brady acknowledged at a
couple of recent Congressional hearings that they are looking at the
He seemed to be
question of the extent of their reliance [on them].
trying to downplay the effects that might follow from that, noting it
is only a modest portion of their net borrowings; 7-1/2 percent or so
I believe that, after a very sharp
is done in the 30-year area.
reaction following that first day's reference, a clarification came
out [from the Treasury] to the effect that people should not look for
So, the market was left with
them to abandon totally the long bonds.
the impression that there might well be some scaling down but probably
not an abandonment.
MR. BOEHNE.

Is this a variation of the Operation Twist idea?

MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it has some resemblance, although in
the case of Operation Twist there was a positive desire to see shortterm rates higher as a balance-of-payments remedy; that element has
The Treasury might just [want to] leave
not been present this time.
both ends lower.
MR. KOHN. And to our knowledge, they haven't tried to enlist
the Fed in this effort--at least not yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Peter?

MR. SYRON. Peter, is there a central tendency in the range
It seems to have
of views on the effectiveness of this kind of thing?
had a big expectations effect.
MR. STERNLIGHT. We hear such a range of views that it would
I have heard very
be hard to say whether there's a real coalescing.
strongly put views from some in the bond market who think it would not
do much good at all; and they are very troubled with the idea of
tinkering with the Treasury's regularity and reliance on the long end.
On the other hand, there are some who feel that some modification
could be useful and recommend it as at least a partial step.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Now, what is interesting here is that
there has been extensive literature on Operation Twist, and my
recollection is that it's pretty mixed. No one has been able to
confirm that there is a significant supply-side effect occurring in
that particular context. On the other hand, there is also evidence,
mainly in the recent period, that the Treasury rate is higher relative
to private instruments than it otherwise would be, from which one
assumes that there is a supply-side effect. So, I would say that
there is no really strong analytical evidence that confirms this one
And what I find a little surprising is how strongly
way or the other.

12/17/91

the market responded to Brady's initial

[remarks]; I think rates moved

down 5 basis points at the long end of the market.

MR. ANGELL. Unfortunately, any time public officials make
comments about taking away the supply of an instrument that the
markets have been accustomed to using--. And with the considerable
demand for strips that is out there, it does seem to me a bit
dangerous to destroy in a sense an entire market system, including

that largest commodity of all which is Treasury bond futures.
is, I think moderating the supply is quite different from any

That

discussion of taking the instrument away.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Peter?
If
not, would somebody like to move to [ratify] the actions of the Desk

since the last meeting?
MR. KELLEY.

So move.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We now move on to
reviewing an issue that we have discussed previously. You may recall
that Governor Kelley raised a question with respect to the directive
language relating to intermeeting instructions. We've gone through a
series of [discussions] on that and I thought it might be useful if
Governor Kelley could bring us up to date on where we stand and
perhaps make recommendations as to how we might finally resolve this
question.
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The Committee will
recall that after our inconclusive discussion of this matter on August
20th, the Chairman asked me, with the good help of Norm and Don, to
poll the Committee and see if a preference could be developed. We
appreciate the response of Committee members. Everyone participated
but I have to say that it still was not at all definitive. We had
presented three options. The poll came out 7 for option 1, 7 for
option 2, and 2 for option 3, which left us in a bit of a quandary.
As a result of that, we felt that we should at least come back today
and put on the table again the two recommendations that were at either
end of the spectrum [of alternatives].
If you'll turn to pages 17 and
18 of your Bluebook, alternatives II and III there represent the two
ends of the spectrum of possibilities that we discussed earlier.
Alternative II would represent the continuation of the current
approach. And if the Committee comes out of this discussion wishing
to go that route, we'll have to look further at whether or not we want
to change the order of what we have. Alternative III on page 18 is
the other end of the spectrum, which is to delete the entire matter
and start over. I would like to recommend, if I may, alternative I on
page 17. This is the response to the initial alternative number II
from the memo back last fall, which is to try to use elements of what
we have had but restructured somewhat. You've read that language and
I won't repeat it. This is an attempt to focus on long-term goals,
which is the essence of the old alternative number II. It also makes
reference to the factors that the Committee considers in its
directive. That is in reference to the old alternative I, which
called for continuing that. Also, by watering this down and making it
much more generic, it is an attempt to give, at least on an implied
basis, some emphasis to the desire possibly to get away from this

12/17/91

So, Mr. Chairman, my recommendation would be that
system altogether.
we adopt this language in alternative number I on page 17 of the
Bluebook with the understanding, of course, that this could be brought
up and reviewed at any time and probably should at any rate be looked
at by the Committee at least once a year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's pretty reasonable and I
I think it's a clear
would support your point of view on this.
improvement over where we stand.
MR. PARRY. I would support it as well.
I think it's good to
have the distinction between long-run objectives and attention to the
shorter-term developments in the economic, financial, and monetary
areas in the same basic sentence. And I think it's an improvement
over what we had.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. For the reasons that the Chairman and Bob Parry
It does make
gave and that Mike Kelley talked about, I support this.
it clearer and I like the idea of considering it once a year rather
than debating at Committee meetings the exact wording of this from
time to time. The only question I have--I'm just curious--is that I'd
like to ask Peter how much all the things we put out there are
scrutinized. I don't see [this matter] coming up on the screens
Given the [directive]
often.
I do see it in newsletters, etc.
I support doing it but I'm
publication lags, how big a deal is that?
just curious.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
there are changes.
MR. SYRON.
MR. KELLEY.

I think [the order]

gets attention when

How much attention?
That's why it has not been a big deal.

MR. STERNLIGHT. It gets the analysts' attention and they
write about it in their market letters and so on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think Governor Kelley has done us
a real service in bringing this question up, and I would strongly
support his recommendation seconded by you.
I'm particularly pleased
that he listed price stability and then sustainable economic growth,
since I feel so strongly that that is the route by which we reach
sustainable economic growth. So, I really like the order of those.
MR. KELLEY.
MR. BLACK.

That was especially for you, Bob!
Well, there were some others too--you included, I

think.
MR. KELLEY.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

12/17/91

-5-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I support Governor Kelley's

position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I can support that position.
I guess I don't
have quite as much enthusiasm as others have expressed.
It seems to
me that Governor Kelley ought to know how hard it is to change it once
we've done this.
And with this language it's just almost impossible
to change it, so I think we're back in the same circumstance.
I do
believe there are times that the Committee may wish to give a signal
of changing emphasis; it seems to me that during the '80s we had
foreign exchange markets that did need some attention. And having a
way of responding to that which is necessary, I think, was helpful.
At the same time the movement up in the order of "price level
stability" was a part of the announcement or the signal of the
Committee's determination in that regard, which I think frankly will
get lost in this arrangement. But I can understand when something is
going [to be approved] and so I'm going to vote for it!
[Laughter]
MR. BLACK.
It will shorten the meetings; that's another
advantage of it.
I wish I had thought to mention that!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think this is a clear
improvement over what we have, so I would support Governor Kelley's
recommendation.
I take Governor Angell's point; there's something to
be said for that.
On the other hand, I don't think we're precluded
from making a change if at some point we really wanted to send a
signal.
So, I look forward to reviewing it again next year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I also can read the tape and support this.
I
do agree with Governor Angell that it's useful to have a mechanism to
signal special concern. He mentioned the exchange markets; there
might also be a case where the stock market is weak or financial
institutions are very weak and we might want to signal that that's a
concern. As Bob Forrestal said, we still could do that.
I think this
is an improvement overall, though, and I would support it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Just a word to our two new members: If
you seriously believe that what you're hearing here is that people are
falling in basically because other people are falling in, the same
people will sell you the Brooklyn bridge! Governor LaWare.
MR. LAWARE. I would much prefer alternative III.
I think
it's simple and straightforward and it gives the opportunity to
emphasize in the Policy Record anything that we want to call
particular attention to.
However, I, too, can see that the train

already has left the station, so I will support alternative I as a
step in the right direction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KEEHN.

President Keehn.

Mr. Chairman, while I might have a preference for

adjusting the wording slightly or the order of the objectives, I think

12/17/91

I hear the way things are going and I support Governor Kelley's
recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Does anybody else wish to make any
comments? We will not have an official vote on this but will embody
the obvious consensus in the directive when that is discussed and
I thank Governor Kelley. And I am
voted upon later in the meeting.
impressed with the way he strong-armed everybody on the Committee into
accepting his position! We now move to the economic situation and
Messrs. Prell and Truman will prevail.
MR. PRELL.
MR. TRUMAN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
gentlemen?

Thank you.

Questions for either of the

MR. FORRESTAL. Mike, we've talked a lot about consumer
How
I'm just curious:
confidence over the last couple of months.
much do you take into account in your forecast the Conference Board
surveys and the Michigan Survey results?
MR. PRELL. Well, [the reliability of the] information we are
getting from those data is a matter of considerable dispute among
researchers. I think there is considerable evidence that they do add
something to the relevant data one has for judging what consumer
spending is doing currently. The increment to our knowledge of what
will happen down the road is probably more limited. We had basically
taken it as a sign early on, when we saw the drop in last month's
figures, that this was going to be a weak quarter for consumer
spending; and I wouldn't want to read much more into it at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. In the key assumptions section, you discussed
fiscal policy and indicated that action was likely but that the impact
was likely to be quite small in terms of affecting the economy in '92
or '93.
I wondered if you could give us some views about what some of
This is more a question for Don
the most likely possibilities are.
Winn, I guess.
If we
MR. PRELL. Well, I would duck that to anyone I could!
had a strong conviction about what the composition and magnitude of
any package would be, given our guess that something is going to
happen, we would have put it in. We really don't know. There are
significant differences among the packages, [such as] emphasis on
actions that would reduce the cost of capital versus other things that
would provide a rapid transfer of income to middle class households or
whatever. These things vary considerably and their impacts would be
significantly different, I think, in timing and potential dimension.
MR. PARRY. It seems to me that a lot of them, in the effort
to try to maintain the integrity of the budget agreement, end up
almost with no effect.
MR. PRELL. Well, that fact was one of the reasons--and I
I do think
think we at least hinted at it--why we didn't put it in.

12/17/91

they still feel somewhat constrained at this point by the size of the
budget deficit and the Budget Act itself. No one seems to be talking
about really large net fiscal impulses, so we felt we wouldn't be
missing much by not including the package in the forecast at this
point and merely suggesting that the direction is likely to be
stimulative but probably not very large.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mike, you [raised] a question on equipment
spending.
On the face of it there is a pretty significant change,
with different concepts to some extent, between equipment spending in
this Greenbook and the last Greenbook. There's some discussion of
this, but I was curious:
Is this almost entirely attributable to
changes in weights in the computer sector so that, in terms of how you
think businesses are reacting, there is nothing to be read into your
forecast on equipment spending this quarter as compared to last
quarter?
MR. PRELL. Well, the change in computer deflators that went
into the index is a major factor in the change in this forecast.
MR. SYRON.

It must be a big change!

MR. PRELL. But we've also anticipated, in light of the
stalling out of overall activity, that there's going to be a greater
deferral of equipment spending.
So there's an element of fundamental
change in the forecast.
I might also note that the revisions in the
national income accounts give a larger weight to nonresidential
construction in business fixed investment. And given that that's a
very weak component in the forecast, that also tends to damp the
expansion of business fixed investment in this forecast.
MR. TRUMAN. One other aspect of this is that on the trade in
computers, which is subject to the same kind of influences, it does
seem that there has been a structural shift.
Our trade in the
computer area, broadly defined, is such that essentially we now have
balanced trade. We've gone from a situation in which we had a slight
surplus in this [area] to balanced trade. That seems to be associated
largely with the change in the structure of the market whereby
mainframes and so forth are being de-emphasized and peripherals,
software, and other computer processing [equipment] are being
emphasized more.
[These categories] are those that tend to come in
from abroad and [they are subject to] all kinds of relocation
decisions and so forth and so on. We have vaguely adjusted to that
process as it seems to have unfolded over the course of 1991, and we
see no basis for [assuming] it will change. Therefore, we have in
some sense a stronger import component to computer-related demands
than we had built into our forecast before.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?
If not, can we
start on our round table?
Who would like to start off?
MR. MELZER. Alan, I'll start on the theory that if I say
something positive maybe we'll get three or four more [doing so] after

12/17/91

me; that's the usual pattern. Lately, we've been starting too much on
a negative note, so I'm going to go first.
In terms of the latest numbers we have on the District, we
have had reasonably strong payroll employment growth over the period,
about a percentage point higher than nationally. Most of that is
coming from manufacturing, although there's some growth in the
nonmanufacturing segment. Residential construction is particularly
Contracts are up 10 percent;
strong over the three-month period.
that's not at an annual rate; that's a percentage increase over the
prior three-month period. Nonresidential is still weak.
If we
Our banking sector really continues to look very good.
look at the numbers through the third quarter in the Eighth District
1 percent ROAs; 12-1/2 percent ROEs;
overall, we're looking at:
nonperforming loans that are really up imperceptibly over the last
year and are at less than 2 percent; and reserves that are about 10
In fact, in
basis points shy of fully covering nonperforming loans.
the month of November at the large reporting banks we have seen for
the first time some meaningful loan growth, mostly in the C&I sector.
That sector in that month was up 2 percent--not an annual rate but 2
percent absolutely.
The anecdotal information is hard to read, but what I keep
picking up is that [business conditions] are basically pretty much the
same, though I wouldn't be surprised to see a little deterioration in
employment showing through in the last couple of months of the year.
The national sentiment that we all read about in the press is quite a
bit different than the numbers we're seeing in the Eighth District.
As for the economy overall, the only comment I'd be inclined
to make is that I think there are dangers inherent in trying to apply
what the economy is doing right now to what policy ought to be doing.
Obviously, that doesn't take account
I worry increasingly about that.
of the lags, and there is no gauge of the thrust of policy in there.
I hope we get some positive comments to follow.
That's all I have.
[Laughter]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
President Forrestal.

That wasn't bad; it's like a jump-start.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, maybe I should defer my comments!
[Laughter]
I'm not sure I can fulfill Tom's expectations, although I
don't think I'll be completely negative, Tom. Basically, Mr.
Chairman, there has been very little change over the past couple of
That
months in the level of economic activity in the Sixth District.
is to say, I think we're just bumping along the bottom; there's no
Some of
acceleration, but there's no perceptible deceleration either.
the people I've talked to over the past couple of weeks, including our
directors, tend to confirm this.
They certainly are not very happy
with the state of the economy, but they also are reporting that they
don't anticipate any further declines.
One of
Retail sales are better than retailers had expected.
the things that is constraining sales in the District is low
inventories, and that's especially true of discounters. All of the
retailers, of course, are citing very cautious spending--a cautious
attitude--on the part of consumers. A lot of consumers apparently are

12/17/91

waiting for further markdowns, further promotions.
So, as we get
closer to Christmas, there's an expectation on the part of some of the
retailers that they may get a surge in their sales this week or early
next week. We did a survey of retailers in the four states that have
most of the population in our District and they're anticipating an
increase of 2 to 3-1/2 percent.
That was [the figure] for the 23 days
ending on December 7; I hope they're able to realize that for the
entire season. The gains are generally in nondurables, as I guess we
would expect.
Residential real estate activity is basically flat.
The
commercial side is still very, very poor. The commercial developers
are still complaining about lack of credit. But for the most part I
think their not getting credit is a good thing because I don't think
they are very good credit risks, at least the ones I've talked to.
On
the other side of the fence, very large firms in the District outside
of the commercial real estate area are reporting that bankers are now
coming down and visiting them with some regularity, attempting to book
some business. Those firms, of course, are the ones that can go
anywhere in the marketplace to get financing. So, that's the
situation in the District.
It's very little changed; it's basically
flat for the most part.
With respect to the national economy, our forecast was
revised down but not quite as much as the Greenbook forecast.
Our
forecast for the current quarter and the first quarter is somewhat
higher than the Greenbook. As we get out in the second half of 1992,
the two forecasts are about the same, but then we show a modest
deceleration as we get into 1993.
The differences are basically in
consumption and investment.
Our inflation forecast is lower this
quarter and in the first quarter of next year than the Greenbook but
higher over the forecast horizon.
I certainly agree with the comment
in the Greenbook that the risks to the forecast seem to be more evenly
balanced than they have been recently.
What all of this suggests to me in terms of policy is that we
certainly have done a lot over the past several months. And I think
at this point that we have to be very careful not to overdo the
stimulus in the economy; we need to proceed very, very cautiously.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, business sentiment and confidence
and general economic conditions in the Twelfth District have
deteriorated since our last meeting. Confidence of District business
leaders and expectations of retail sales have weakened. The comments
we receive from our directors and Beigebook contacts are now almost
uniformly negative with the only exceptions being those from Utah and
Idaho, where conditions are really quite good. Department store and
auto sales in early December are reported to be extremely weak
throughout the District. Employment conditions in California and the
State of Washington have worsened while remaining the same in other
District states--that is, relatively strong with the exception of
Arizona. After leveling this summer, payroll employment in California
has fallen for three consecutive months. And employment in the State
of Washington has declined in 7 of the past 8 months, with job losses
centered in construction and also in trade. Manufacturing employment

12/17/91

-10-

in the State of Washington remains stable and that's largely a result
of the strength of Boeing. Conditions in most other District states
are relatively stronger. In October, employment expanded at annual
rates ranging from 1.6 percent in Hawaii to 13 percent in Alaska, with
most states growing in the 7 to 9 percent range.
Employment in
Arizona, however, declined for the second consecutive month.
As I'm sure you know, agriculture has become the largest
industry in California and it's very important in the District as
well.
We seem to have a series of problems that affect agriculture,
such as drought and those kinds of things.
The new one, of course, is
the white fly infestation, which is devastating the Imperial Valley.
What we now see is of such a magnitude that it actually had a
significant impact on the CPI in November.
So, we're not sure what
other natural disasters can befall us, but there probably are one or
two more that we could experience.
Turning to the national outlook, data since our last meeting
have certainly led us to revise down significantly our forecast for
Like the Greenbook, we expect
real GNP in this quarter and the next.
the economy to be roughly flat in the current quarter. For the first
quarter of next year we do have a slight positive; but since the
uncertainty is so high I certainly wouldn't argue strongly with the
small decline incorporated in the Greenbook. In the quarters that
follow we have growth rebounding to around 3 percent, with the major
source of strength being spending for inventories and also some
strength in the interest-sensitive sectors of the economy.
It seems
to us that the outlook for inflation is clearly encouraging.
It
certainly was good to see the lower PPI and CPI figures for November
as well as the moderation in unit labor costs.
Overall, we expect a
reduction of inflation in 1992 compared with the average of this year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Incidentally, is there anything that is
being done on the infestation to suggest that it can be eliminated at
some point?
MR. PARRY. They really don't have many ways of dealing with
it.
Apparently, the chemicals don't work very effectively, so what
they're looking for are some natural predators.
I think they have
found some small [unintelligible] or something like that that is a
natural predator. But the infestation is spreading; it has already
gone into Arizona and is moving a little farther north in California,
but it won't get too far north because of the cold. But the Imperial
Valley, which has mainly truck types of crops--lettuce, tomatoes,
strawberries, and things like that--really has been devastated. The
white flies have wiped out over 70 percent of the honeydew crop, for
example.
MR. BLACK.

What kind of insect is that white fly?

MR. PARRY.

I don't know.

I'll get the technical description

later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I'll admit to feeling a bit on the
gloomy side.
In a District context, the moderating pattern that has

12/17/91

been in evidence for quite some while is continuing.
I don't think
it's necessarily accelerating, but it certainly is continuing.
As I have so frequently commented, the automotive business of
course has a very major impact on the District's activities and it is
continuing to exert something of a negative influence. The order rate
for dealers has been consistently underneath the manufacturing
production level with the result that the production schedules are
continually reduced.
In the fourth quarter, production is going to
come in substantially under what just a month or two ago was revised
to the very lowest level possible. There was something of an increase
in the order rate in the first week in December, but I am told that
about half of that increase was the result of fleet sales, not higher
retail demand. The first-quarter production rates are very uncertain
at this point.
Initially, they have been set at a level a little
lower than the fourth-quarter level, but there is every expectation
that as we get into the quarter they will be reduced further. But
because the first quarter of 1991 was so very weak, in a comparative
sense at least the production levels may exert a positive influence.
The forecast sales levels for 1992 are about one million units higher
than 1991, but much of the increase is in the second half. And,
frankly, it seems more of a hope than a forecast of the reality.
All of this is backing up into the supplier group.
Steel
companies are experiencing cuts resulting from the auto manufacturers.
The orders have been reduced by about 10 percent for January and
February and, as a result, the operating rates in the steel industry
have declined and are currently down to about 77 percent. Therefore,
the first-quarter expectations for steel will be weaker than they were
before. Still, they are expecting for the full year that shipments
will come in at about 82 million tons.
That would be up from about
78-1/2 million tons this year. The other suppliers to the auto sector
are experiencing similar curtailments.
It looks to us as if in a
direct and indirect sense the automotive industry may have a negative
impact of as much as 1 percent on fourth-quarter GDP; and it may also
have a continuing negative effect in the first quarter.
The heavy truck business continues to be terribly weak. The
class A truck shipments this year will come in at about 100,000 units.
For next year the expectation is that the shipments will go up to
109,000 units, so it's quite an increase. Nevertheless, we have to
compare that number with what shipments could be in a good year, and
shipments could come in--have come in--at as much as 175,000 units.
District employment increased in October; that's the latest
month that we have available.
But the unemployment claims rose in
November, and a survey of hiring plans for the first quarter indicates
a decline in the Midwest from the fourth quarter. The Chicago
Purchasing Managers survey indicated a pretty substantial decline in
November; there was even a steeper decline in Detroit. And the
Chicago December report, which will be coming out later this month,
shows a further decline.
With regard to retail sales, it's a little hard to get a
picture; but I think the outlook is a little better, particularly for
those in the discounting business. For those people the early
Christmas sales seem to be running a little over last year. But
alternatively, those who are not in the discounting business are

-12-

12/17/91

having a very tough time. One specialty retailer I talked to said
that currently he's having the worst experience he has had in 29

years.

He gave me a report on sales in the various regions that they

cover and I was surprised that in Chicago in the first week of
December they had an 8-1/2 percent decline in sales from the first
week of December last year.
On the inflation side, given the competitive conditions,
pricing is really very, very tough. One major manufacturer said that
they have gotten decreases in the prices of their outside purchases of

1.4 percent this year and they are forecasting a further 0.6 percent
decrease next year. Despite some attempts to raise steel prices, I am
told that steel prices more broadly are still at about the 1980
levels, so there is no improvement there. The wage patterns continue
to be favorable, but I will say there's a growing level of anxiety
about the Caterpillar strike, which at this point looks very, very
difficult.
In a national context, the reduced staff forecast certainly
seems plausible. In fact, our current look at the first quarter would
be just a bit better than the staff forecast, but we have the
remaining quarters of 1992 weaker than in the staff's outlook. I
think there's a lot of hope in this expectation that we'll get a
turnaround. To me the risk is that the growth rate, if we get it,
won't be strong enough to sustain itself and that we could, therefore,
get back into a deteriorating environment. And it seems to me that
our policy actions have to deal with that risk.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think it's a very difficult time
to forecast. Of course, it's always hard but it is particularly
difficult now. Looking back, the vast majority of forecasts--and that
certainly includes our forecast--underestimated the strength of the
negative forces that are apparently working in the economy. But I
guess by now we really should realize that some of this restructuring
and downsizing that we've seen in a lot of different industries will
not only eliminate existing jobs--forever probably--but will also
raise a lot of doubts in the minds of others about their job security,
with predictable effects on consumer and business confidence. I think
we've all been aware that there are some important structural changes
taking place in the economy, but we underestimated the extent to which
they were restraining consumer income and spending. And, of course,
in this highly uncertain environment, the disinflation process is
making it increasingly difficult for businesses to pass on any
increase in prices. The firms are naturally very reluctant to hire
and are cautious about inventory management, not to mention capital
expenditures. This caution really augurs well for the long run
because I think we're going to emerge with a much more competitive
society than we had before. But certainly in the short run it has
some implications for the level of business activity and I think it's
going to retard the recovery beyond what we had thought earlier.
When you think about the structural changes and couple those
with some cyclical changes occurring on top of them, it makes it very
difficult to predict how strong and how persistent these restraining
forces are going to be and to what extent they're going to be offset
by the lagged effects of the considerable easing in monetary policy

12/17/91

-13-

we've done over a period of a number of months.
The Greenbook
projections of the real economy strike us as reasonable and quite
plausible, given what we now know. We do think the staff might be a
little high in their projections of inflation, although those are
certainly reasonable. But I believe the inflation outcome in [1992]
is going to be a tad better than projected in the Greenbook if we can
maintain the System's credibility about our long-term objectives.
That last point is a very crucial one as we move into this policysetting process today. Another measured step toward ease of the sort
we've been taking for some time is probably appropriate now, but I
think any more aggressive move would be quite counterproductive at
this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
In the Philadelphia District, I'd say [activity]
is flat to down, with little prospect for an upturn on the horizon.
Manufacturing, which had been a relative bright spot earlier in the
year, has turned down--and rather sharply--in December. Some of that
is auto-related but it's broader than that.
Construction, which had
seen a modest improvement in housing, is down; there's a lot of gloom
in the construction industry, with very little near-term prospect for
improvement. Retail sales are about even with last year; but the
number of people that the retailers are hiring is down, so there's a
negative effect on employment.
I still see a slippage in loan quality
at banks.
It's particularly evident--though it may just be because
I've spent more time on it in the last few weeks--in de novo banks,
which seem to be running into some additional problems. In terms of
attitudes, I don't sense that there has been a deterioration in
attitudes so much as a "hunkering down" kind of sentiment--a view that
what we have may last a while.
Turning to the nation, the Greenbook forecast is certainly
reasonable, but I think the risks are still on the down side, perhaps
more so than six weeks ago when we last met.
It's difficult to find a
sector to lead a recovery. And having gone through this so-called
inventory cycle, I have less confidence in that the second time around
than the first.
I think this hunkering down attitude just reflects
less confidence that we will have a recovery. There's also a second
downside risk and that is that monetary policy will continue to have
less of a stimulative effect than one might ordinarily think. This
could very well turn out to be one of those recessions--and we've had
them before--in which we have to push the fed funds rate below the
inflation rate in order to get the kind of forward momentum to the
economy to bring the Greenbook forecast about.
In any event, with
inflationary pressures subsiding--and they clearly are--I think this
double-downside risk provides room for some additional monetary
easing, and I would prefer it sooner rather than later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As has been the case
for some time now, District business activity is mediocre.
It really
hasn't weakened much--and we seem to have been insulated from some of
the major problems around--but it isn't all that strong either.
Unemployment remains uniformly low in the District; attitudes,
nevertheless, are quite negative.
There are some positive signs, for
what it's worth. It really is true that you can't find a parking

12/17/91

-14-

space in the shopping malls on the weekends.

Retailers are quick to

point out that people are looking for bargains and not buying as much
as they used to, and so forth. But we'll see if that plays out.
All
I can tell you is that there's a lot of traffic.
The auto dealers
report that sales are bad but traffic in the showrooms has picked up.
Perhaps people are looking for bargains or perhaps they're getting

ready to buy something sooner or later. In any event, there's at
least a glimmer of hope there. Sectors that have been in pretty good
shape for some time include tourism, agriculture, and the retailers
who are reachable from Canada. Those areas of the economy continue to
move along as they have been moving and really are quite healthy.
With regard to the national situation, I agree with the
comments that have already been made and, as the Greenbook forecast is
currently depicting, that the risks are probably symmetric. I was
puzzling for a long time as to why attitudes, particularly business
attitudes, are as bad as they are, given that the aggregate data don't
look that bad. But it seems to me that the aggregate data are
starting to catch up with the attitudes, and that's reconciling that
difference at least in my mind. But what I would emphasize at this
point is a comment that Mike Prell made earlier, which is that
disinflation is in train. And I think that's something that we can
look forward to. Anecdotally, it's very hard to find much in the way
of price pressures. I was struck by a meeting we had at the Bank
recently during which a lot of private-sector employers in the Twin
Cities reported [that they expect] wage increases of about 3 percent
for the year ahead. Of course, benefits are rising more rapidly than
that, but 3 percent is the kind of number we haven't heard in the Twin
Cities in quite some time. There's a lot of concern looking to the
future about aggregate demand; but we've been looking at supply,
recognizing that that's somewhat of an artificial distinction. But it
looks to us at least as if the 1980s were characterized by unusually
rapid growth in labor force participation and unusually large
increases in hours worked. If that is not repeated in the 1990s, and
it doesn't seem likely, then the supply side of the economy's ability
to grow seems to me to be constrained unless we get real improvement
in productivity--which, of course, is possible, but hard to bank on-or unless we believe that when the aggregate demand comes back the
gaps are going to be made up by imports. So, we may be looking at a
situation where not only is aggregate demand likely to be subdued, but
the growth in productive capacity may be as well.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Yes, Mr. Chairman. Even though it seems as if
the economy is dead in the water--and the forecasts for the fourth
quarter and the first quarter certainly suggest that--I think it's

better to look at the economy as being balanced by certain sectors and
regions in which growth is occurring, albeit rather slowly, and other
sectors and regions in which there are continuing adjustments and some

retrenchment. So, it seems to me that there still is not the
synchronization of all of these sectors and regions into a common
inventory cycle phenomenon. Consequently, it seems to me that the
seeds for growth are building even while we're in this period of a
pretty flat economy.
Secondly, I want to suggest that the pessimism we see
associated with this [economy] is a real estate phenomenon. It's a

12/17/91

-15-

long-cycle real estate phenomenon and it is accompanied by depository
institution difficulties that look just like those that were
experienced in the 1920s and 1930s. And it seems to me that we are
not immune from the sense of pessimism associated with that kind of an
event.
I think it would be well for us to remind ourselves of some
significant differences between the current conditions and those that
prevailed during that last banking-real estate episode.
First of all, I would suggest that the monetary aggregates-whether you look at Ml, M2, or M3--are growing; they are not
contracting. And there's a substantial difference between monetary
contraction and slow money growth. If you look at Ml as well as M2,
there's some indication here that we are supplying liquidity to the
system. And that liquidity, as shown in the steep yield curve, will
work its way. Now, in the 1930s the banking system did not have the
heavy concentration of Treasuries in their portfolios that they hold
now. At that time, as many of you probably remember, the government
debt was contracted from about $24 billion in 1920 to about $16
billion in 1929.
So, in that episode, we didn't have commercial banks
chasing yield into long-term Treasury securities.
And the commercial
banks had a quality bond problem. It wasn't just a question then of
having bad loans; it was also a question of having bonds, both
municipal and business corporate bonds, that were not marketable. And
when that quality spread developed, the banking system was, of course,
locked in with those securities.
So, they didn't just have bad loans.
They had bad loans in bonds as well as bad loans of the usual kind.
Of course, they did not have something that we have today and that is
deposit insurance.
I know a lot of people have been complaining about
deposit insurance systems, but this is not too bad a time to have one,
it seems to me!
[Laughter]
And, of course, that's why we haven't had
a monetary contraction. If we had had these depository institution
failures without deposit insurance, it seems to me that there would
have been no way we could have kept the money stock growing.
The second thing I would mention is that we are not in a
deflation period as measured by the producer price index. In the
latter 1920s and early 1930s, we had very steeply declining prices
that brought the price level down 40 to 50 percent below where it had
been before. We haven't yet had what I would call a significant
producer price index decline. And the fact that the PPI for finished
goods is now year-over-year at minus .5 percent is hardly an
indication of a deflation underway.
The third point I would mention is that our system is indeed
a transfer payment system that does offer a huge amount of support.
I
mean by that not just Social Security, but Medicaid, Medicare, and
unemployment compensation, and also a rather large pension plan
program. So, that provides a great deal of sustenance.
The fourth thing I'd mention--I know one could add more to
the list but I'm going to stop at four--is that world trade is
expanding.
It's not expanding quite as rapidly as it was a few years
ago, but it's still expanding. And in the 1930s, as you know, we were
undergoing the threat from the Hawley-Smoot tariff. So, this
circumstance is so different that to me it doesn't make sense for us
to let that kind of fear permeate our ranks.

-16-

12/17/91

Now, as to the monetary aggregates, I frankly am not worried
at this point about M1's growth rate. When I look at Ml and M2--and
M2 seems to be dawdling along at a little higher [growth] rate than it
was before--it doesn't seem to me that this is a problem at this point
I'm not going to join the forces of alarmists in
on either side.
But I do remember, Ed, that in 1986 when I was not too
regard to Ml.
worried about M2 growing at a rate of 9-1/2 percent and some of you
were saying that that was a problem, that it did turn out to be
So, I don't know at what point in time
somewhat problematic.
At this point,
liquidity in a sense catches hold and shows up.
commodity prices do not show any force of over-liquification as Ml's
growth rate might indicate. That is, I don't see any upward bulge in
commodity prices that says we're putting too much liquidity in the
system. But neither do I see commodity prices forecasting a
It does seem to me, though, that the commodity
significant deflation.
prices are forecasting stable producer prices and some diminution in
the commodity price index. But I think it's worth noting Bob Parry's
report regarding agriculture. Civilizations do go through periods in
And it seems to me
which certain [anomalies] in agriculture show up.
that we do run the risk that we're in an era in which food prices may
be subject to more [unfavorable] surprises than good surprises.
In conclusion, it seems to me that the healing forces and the
recovery forces--with a little longer time lags than we're used to-are really underway. I don't want to try to do any better at
forecasting [than the staff]; I don't have any quarrel with Mike's
I don't think we've ever been to this place before,
forecast at all.
and I don't know for sure that that's the way it's going to work, but
it does seem to me that this is a time for a little patience.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Bill Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We concur with the
Board staff's view that growth of the economy has stalled, although we
are not quite as bearish about retail sales in the fourth quarter as
Perhaps, like Gary Stern in
is indicated in the staff's estimates.
Minneapolis, we view the outlook from the vantage point of a District
that has outperformed the nation since last spring, although there are
Ohio unemployment rose
signals of softening in our area, too.
slightly in November for the third consecutive month and the
unemployment rate held steady at about 5.6 percent, which is low
relative to the nation. Retail sales and manufacturing production
also have been stronger than the national averages, at least through
September.
And construction contracts for both non-residential and
residential homes have continued to grow faster than for the nation
Our concern, as Si Keehn also has indicated, is that
through October.
scheduled cutbacks in auto production extending into the first quarter
of '92 may be working through the auto supply industries in our
Steel operations are under downward pressure. Our steel
District.
contacts note that delivery lead times have been shrinking in recent
weeks; customers are no longer on a quota; and order books for flat
rolled steel now have openings for late January delivery. Capital
goods production is still mixed but apparently on a slowly rising
trend.
I would conclude by mentioning that, despite a pervasive mood
of pessimism, even among business executives we see no widespread
Indeed, some producers plan
cutbacks of capital spending plans.
increases in 1992 and they have not changed their plans, while a few

12/17/91

-17-

others are scaling down spending increases in view of the lower-thanexpected sales and profits in recent months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the First District
the economy remains poor, but we have some hope that it may [improve]
to mixed. However, there is concern that the mood--you probably saw
that story in the front page of the Sunday New York Times about
depression in New England--certainly exceeds the reality in terms of
sourness. I think this is something that has been spreading
nationally recently, not just in New England. But even though there
isn't a fit between the mood and the reality, this does have a
psychological effect which feeds back on the economy, and it's
obviously something that overhangs [unintelligible].
We think that we
probably would not be that far from the bottom in New England if we
were to have a national outcome somewhat like that in the Greenbook in
that employment losses are stabilizing and there is some beginning of
stabilization in the banking situation.
On the retail side, we talked to retailers over the last
several days and they say that people are being extremely cautious.
This is reflected in some interesting ways. One way, according to a
major retailer, is that as there are successive sales, a lot of people
are coming back and bringing items to the return window because
something they bought at $14 last week is advertised at $9.95 this
week. So there's more foot traffic in a way than there are sales,
though we don't have any problem with parking spaces at this stage!
I'll report what one retailer told us regarding sales:
Sales, while
bad, are not terrible in that there's an expectation that on a yearover-year basis many [retailers] may actually break even, though some
national chains we've spoken to have indicated that they see a
spreading of the situation in New England to the rest of the country.
Part of that is because inventories have been kept so lean, and
purposely so. And some retailers say that they are losing sales
because inventories are so lean. But if the choice is to take a
chance on one side or the other, they are not going to [take it on the
side of] inventories.
The job market remains very soft. A personal anecdote on
that is that we have something called a "sunrise shift" in our cash
operation, with hours from 4 to 8 in the morning and no benefits. It
has turned out to be very effective for us. We had three openings on
that shift and when we advertised in the Boston Globe we had 1,000
applicants. The applicants actually had to come in and apply--there
wasn't any sending in of resumes--so we know that people were serious
about it. On the other side, we do see some change in the timing of
projects by state and local governments with the notion that this is a
good time both to finance and to get lower construction costs.
As far as the Greenbook goes, we find it realistic this time
and possibly even slightly too pessimistic--in terms of what it
forecasts for the economy per se, not the potential results. We do
think that the unemployment rate for any given level of output could
be slightly higher than the Greenbook forecast. But, looking at all
of this, one starts to [question] what went wrong and why things are
so much softer than they had been. There has been some reference, and
I think appropriately so, to the restructuring phenomenon and the

12/17/91

-18-

effect of that on confidence and to these longer-term issues about
which there may not be much that we can do. Another interesting
question, and I don't know the answer, is whether any of the changes
in the tax code and the composition of employment this time have
diminished the effect of the automatic stabilizers in some ways--there
must be some data on this--and whether the decline for any given
change in economic activity and federal receipts has been a little
less this time.
There are arguments one can make to say that that was
the case.
Whatever it is, things aren't working as expected. And in
an [environment] in which things aren't working as expected--even
though, as I say, the Greenbook forecast is pretty realistic--what I'm
concerned about is the risk or the impact of an error. And I think
Mike mentioned that.
We've been through this a number of times; we
don't need a lot of discussion on the amount of fragility in the
financial system or in expectations. But I do think one has to be
quite concerned about the potential spreading of this level of
inappropriate panic.
Like many other people, I do see an improvement
in inflation. I see it on the wage side and, with the number of
medical providers that we have in our District, we've begun to see
even the beginning of some steps being taken on benefits, which will
have an effect in the longer run.
As far as policy goes, I know that we have this overhang
regarding what may happen on the fiscal side. But from my own
perspective, that argues for our doing what we think we can more
promptly rather than less promptly before concerns become evident
[unintelligible] have a little less uncertainty about what the range
I'll finish by saying that if
of options may be on the fiscal side.
an action is taken, I think there is some value to maximizing the
signal impact of any given amount of change because of what I
personally feel are the psychological aspects of this.
There's
nothing we can do about the short run but the environment that we've
been in I think does demonstrate the problems involved in an interestrate targeting regime and what that implies in terms of discrete
steps.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Well, I think the economy is dead in the water
with no forward momentum or maybe drifting back a little but with no
momentum there as well.
I can't really quarrel with the Greenbook
forecast for the fourth quarter or the first quarter. For the second
quarter of next year the Greenbook has 2.6 percent real growth in GDP.
We haven't had a quarter like that in over 3 years.
If we get it, it
could be perceived as a boom and might be disorienting to people!
[Laughter]
I think that second quarter is where it is difficult to
see what is going to happen.
The Greenbook puts an emphasis on the
inventory cycle and on a rebound of consumer spending as the saving
rate falls.
Since I've been here I haven't been impressed with our
ability to predict inventories, but the logic is there for the
inventory side.
The consumer rebound is difficult for me to see when
I think of the environment next year where the media will have a
We will have a political
couple more negative quarters to work with.
debate which will aspire to divisiveness and may achieve it.
I think
there is serious downside risk for a stalled economy. The most
obvious one, and the one I would be most concerned about, is that if
confidence continues to be a problem, with the prospects for the
political debate and the media hype, these fears will lead consumers

12/17/91

-19-

to increase their saving rate. And since they are 60 or 70 percent of
the economy, that could propel us downward pretty quickly.
There are many other downside risks for next year, not only
the fiscal policy foolishness. Already perhaps the speculation about
an investment tax credit could be sufficient to freeze capital
spending plans for a while. And, of course, we have large banks on
the precipice as well as maybe a couple of industrial companies as
well.
There are international events. So, I see a little more risk
on the down side.
And, of course, underlying all of this is the
continuing pressure from this retrenchment process, the balance sheet
adjustment process, which it seems to me in retrospect has been going
on for three years.
The recent third-quarter GNP number, which has
now been wiped from all of our data, was revised to 2 percent. We
thought it was going to be revised up. That 2 percent real growth in
GNP was the best quarter since the first quarter of '89, and I think
it was the first quarter of '89 that was biased upward by drought
effects.
So, the compound growth rate over these three years from the
first quarter of '89 to the first quarter of '92 as projected is 1/4
percent annually; essentially, we've had three flat years.
So, I
think the contractive pressure of this retrenchment process is strong;
it's durable and it's stubborn. I see no evidence that it's on the
brink of exhaustion.
Can monetary policy help?
I think it can and has.
One
wonders where the economy would be without the easing actions we've
taken.
I believe the easing we did last year helped lift the economy
out of the more traditional recession--the traditional Gulf or oilprice-related recession--which was superimposed upon this longer-term
adjustment. More recently, I believe the moves we've made since
August have helped stabilize the housing recovery and also have
arrested the free-fall in M2 growth and put it back into the lower end
of the range. But it seems to me the important role for monetary
policy in the current environment is in facilitating this adjustment
process itself. Monetary policy has raised stock prices.
It has
produced the issuance of equities, which has helped in the deleveraging.
It has decreased bank funding costs, which allows banks
to create this margin that will help in building their capital.
The
reductions in the prime rate have reduced the debt burden for firms
and consumers because a lot of home equity loans are tied to the prime
rate.
And, of course, mortgage refinancing has also reduced
homeowners' debt burdens. Even though much of the force of monetary
policy has been absorbed in this balance sheet adjustment process, I
don't view it as wasted energy. This is important work for monetary
policy; it is necessary and indeed unavoidable work. There is no way
monetary policy can short-circuit those adjustment processes, and we
shouldn't try to rekindle the excesses.
I view a role of monetary
policy as advancing the day in which consumers, businesses, and banks
can turn to future growth. So, even if we don't see it immediately
giving rise to real spending, I think it is still having a beneficial
effect.
Where are we in terms of monetary stance?
I think there are
some positives here. We have moved [down] 125 basis points on the fed
funds rate since August; we have moved 75 basis points in the last six
weeks. M2 growth is once again positive and has moved [up] into the
lower end of the [Committe's long-run] range.
The dollar is down.
It's still not as low as it was last year at this time, but it is

12/17/91

-20-

lower than the Greenbook forecast. That is offset a bit by the
softness in the foreign economies. The stock market, despite a few
shudders, has held up; the market sees no double-dip.
One might make
some argument on that as well, but at least it's up there. The yield
curve is still steep.
People are betting real money that rates are
going to be higher in the future, and the quality spreads in the debt
market also have remained relatively narrow. The housing market
appears to be holding up.
Consumer confidence is very low, but it's
still well above the lows of last October and still well above where
it was in the 1982 recession. At least on the Michigan survey that is
true; the Conference Board [index] is somewhat lower.
I think the
recent round of easing and where we stand now has been sufficient to
keep the economy from turning down and to keep it from gathering
momentum on the down side. But it has left the economy pretty much at
a standstill against these forces of retrenchment and I see the
downside risks overhanging next year's environment.
I think we need to be moving ahead; it would be useful to
accelerate the balance sheet adjustment process and offset its impact.
Moreover, I think it's now safe to say that reports of M2's death were
highly exaggerated.
It was only a flesh wound.
We saw M2's weakness
in the summer and now we see weakness in the real economy, even though
other aggregates were giving more positive signals.
We have seen M1
grow at a healthy rate, but we haven't seen that associated with
healthy [economic] growth.
I wonder--and maybe Don Kohn can answer
this later--my general impression on M1 is that it is growing a bit
more slowly than our models would expect, given the reduction in
interest rates. This time around we have no exogenous shocks; we have
no oil price increases or wars; we basically just have to recognize
the force of this retrenchment. And in this environment my view is
that we ought to look for consistent monthly growth of M2 in the upper
half of the range.
I also continue to think that with a prime rate of
7-1/2 percent, given outside analysts' forecasts of near-term
inflation in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range, real rates to final
borrowers remain high at 4 percent over prime. The real prime rate
doesn't look like easy money to me.
So, in conclusion, I still think we need an adjustment in
policy to acknowledge and incorporate the downward pressure from this
retrenchment process and help the economy move ahead. I don't view
this as aggressive counter-cyclical policy but rather as an attempt to
achieve a monetary stance that will both facilitate this adjustment
process and have a little left over for growth.
I don't see potential
damage to the objective of reducing inflation. We don't have high M2
growth. We don't have high credit growth. If you take the federal
government out, credit growth is quite anemic. And we don't yet have
a federal funds rate below the expected inflation rate. In last
summer's Greenbook, we were satisfied with the disinflation path
implicit in 3 percent real growth. Now we have a few quarters of flat
or negative growth and I can't see the risks in returning to the 3
percent path.
If we don't move, I think we risk instability.
My
How do we make the adjustment in monetary stance?
feeling is that it may be time to reconsider the pattern of moving in
an incremental approach and making the smallest moves possible. I'm
concerned that this may dissipate the impact of our actions and not
I'm also getting a bit concerned about
have the signalling effect.
the way the market is responding to the easing pattern rather than

12/17/91

-21-

perhaps to economic fundamentals. They think we ease on employment
reports and before [Congressional] testimony. They're predicting
policy easing rather than focusing on the fundamentals, it seems to
me. And I wonder how much benefit there is to making another fully
anticipated minimum size policy move. We had academic consultants in
"It's time to get this
the other day and one of them said, in effect:
mule's attention."
I doubt that another 1/4 percentage point tap on
the mule's head is likely to do much.
It may be time to figure out
So, I still think
where we want to be and get there and make a stand.
we need an adjustment in policy, but in view of the lags I believe we
should try to get the work done ahead of the uncertainties of next
year.
I would like to be in a position where we would have the
expectation that we would not have any easing to do next year--to be
essentially in a symmetric position. We do have to save some
ammunition for emergencies, but I'd rather make the bulk of the
adjustment in a deliberate manner than gradually dribble out 1/4
I'd like
points with the perception that we have a lot more to go.
for us to be in a confident position to say the Fed has done its part;
M2 is growing; real rates are not high.
My guess is that there is not a unanimous consensus on this;
indeed, I think we have done a lot lately. We might consider at this
stage waiting a bit and doing nothing--waiting a few weeks to break
the pattern of ease and to let the market think about economic
fundamentals. We could wait until the data are more convincing and
then in our own time, for our own reasons, implement a discrete,
significant, adjustment.
If the data don't convince us, we can stand
pat or move another 1/4 point.
I think a few weeks one way or the
other will not make a lot of difference.
I certainly would not oppose
a move now because I think we ought to have a lower rate, but I might
prefer waiting until we have something to communicate rather than
In my view, we
simply to move another fully anticipated 1/4 point.
don't have much room left and we ought to make every move count.
So,
even though I think we should make a move, if there's not agreement,
it might be useful to break the pattern of a slow slide and step back
and wait to make a significant move when we feel comfortable with such
a move. Obviously, I wouldn't vote against another small move, but on
balance I would be comfortable waiting until we have the confidence to
make a symbolically louder move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Well, Mr. Chairman, at the risk of sounding like
a broken record, I will restate my conviction that what we have now is
a crisis or paralysis of confidence. There is clearly [underway] a
deliberate restructuring of balance sheets on the part of consumers,
businesses, and banks to reduce debt and increase equity and
liquidity. And given current attitudes, until that adjustment is much
further along than it is now, I think we will not see a return to
stronger [economic] growth patterns. Confidence is at best an
ephemeral concept and basically it is a psychological phenomenon.
Perhaps if we had a clinical psychologist on the Committee, it might
help!
In the meantime, I remain unconvinced that confidence will be
shored up by a further easing in policy. While I recognize that the
burden of high levels of debt is somewhat alleviated by a lower
structure of interest rates, at the same time I do worry about the
dollar and the risks related to a steeper slide in its value due to an
even more significant interest rate differential. A flight to safety

-22-

12/17/91

may be the thing that is keeping the dollar as stable as it is, given
chaotic conditions in the Soviet Union and eastern Europe. And yet I
am persuaded that we have not seen the full effect of the easing that
we have already accomplished, and I would like to wait before
initiating any further ease.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoenig.

MR. HOENIG. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Our District growth
continues to be slow and we see no real improvement in [prospect] in
the near future.
In agriculture, we expect declines in income of
between 5 and 10 percent this year and we anticipate similar declines
next year.
Activity in the oil and gas areas of our District
continues weak. Drilling operations activity as of November is down
about 30 percent from the year before and there are no signs of any
significant improvement there. Manufacturers, particularly the auto
companies that are operating in our District, are now increasing their
furlough periods.
The General Motors plant is going to go out for
In the
four weeks starting I think this week or next week.
As I mentioned
construction area, our District has seen improvements.
last time, it's partly because we've had such deflation; but we've
seen good residential activity and some nonresidential activity in
parts of our District.
As far as the national economy goes, our staff feels that its
projections are generally in line with those in the Greenbook. We're
not quite as pessimistic for this quarter or the next quarter, but
we're certainly not as optimistic about the rest of 1992.
For
inflation, our forecast is very similar to the Greenbook forecast. We
see no really strong inflationary pressures going forward.
As for the implications for policy, then, we think there is
room for easing, although our preference is along the lines of what
Governor Mullins said in that we think it's something we ought to be
I
prepared to do down the road but would wait and choose our time.
think that would be perhaps a more effective way of going forward.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, as everybody has already said,
this is a tough one.
Clearly, attitudes are lousy. To pick up on
Gary Stern's point that the statistics are catching up with the
attitudes:
Maybe the causation is precisely in that direction and we
have a classic self-fulfilling prophecy. Another interesting thing
that is surfacing now in a rather forceful way, which is attitudinal
in one sense, is that even among informed observers there is this
I just don't
notion that monetary policy is pushing on a string.
Mike Prell touched on it a bit. But if you look
think that's right.
at the behavior of the so-called interest-sensitive parts of spending
versus the so-called non-interest-sensitive parts, at least to date,
the anomaly is not in the interest-sensitive parts; it's in the nonIt's not that the interest-sensitive parts
interest sensitive parts.
are booming, but the big difference is in the non-interest-sensitive
parts which, of course, is consistent with the view that monetary
policy is not pushing on a string. When you look at it a bit more
carefully in the context of this confidence factor, where are the big
It seems to me that one can say, at the risk of a major
differences?

12/17/91

-23-

oversimplification, that the big differences lie in two areas. The
first is government itself. We do have for good and necessary reasons
a more restrictive fiscal policy stance at the federal level, given
where the economy is, than we had in earlier episodes. But what I
think really makes the difference is the combination of the federal
level and the state and local level. Indeed, it seems to me that the
state and local sector in many, many different ways--including the way
it affects confidence--really is one of the major differences in the
economy and the performance of the economy in recent quarters.
Now, the second big difference is the one that many have
touched on and that is the debt overhang problem. The point that
Governor Mullins made is an important one. In part, the workout of
the debt overhang problem has been going on for two or three years,
and I don't think we fully recognized it when it began to take hold.
But it is one of the reasons why the economy as a whole has basically
been limping along for three years. And whatever you think of it, it
obviously still has multifaceted implications both now and for the
immediate future in terms of financial institution problems, balance
sheet rebuilding, corporate restructuring, and all the rest of it.
But the cumulative effects of those things have a lot to do with this
confidence factor that everyone's speaking of. But even after having
said that, I am still perplexed on the one hand and worried on the
other as to why these measures of confidence have dropped like a stone
in the last couple of months. We can argue whether they are at 1982
levels or 1987 levels, but they do just seem to have cracked. Again,
I think Mike's point is right. The economics profession doesn't tell
us much at all about what to make of that. Certainly, it doesn't tell
us much at all about how to build that into a forecast or anything
like that. As a matter of fact, the track record of those [confidence
surveys] is lousy. Nevertheless, we have this sharp downward break in
confidence against the history of all these other events.
Well, I don't know what to make of that any more than anybody
else does. But it does seem to me that at the very least it raises
further questions about the near-term outlook for consumer spending.
As I think I mentioned at the last Committee meeting, the retail
inventory situation isn't great. Now, when we talk to individual
store owners, they say their inventories are lean as the devil; and
when we go into our local department store and look around, the
shelves don't look overburdened. But what we forget is that there are
a heck of a lot more stores out there. There has been a tremendous
increase in the number of retail outlets as a part of this boom of the
'80s. So, the information at the level of the individual store may
not be telling the whole story.
Another concern, in the context of this confidence factor, is
the other side of Dave Mullins's point about the stock market. The
stock market, of course, has been doing terrifically. With all of
these new offerings and stock prices holding up the numbers, it is
actually one of the few things that probably are helping to maintain
confidence. But we have to remember that, by many conventional
measures of PE ratios and things like that, the stock market is at a
pretty high level given any kind of reasonable guess as to what nearterm profits at least are going to be. Now, of course, it may be that
the stock market has really gotten smart and is looking through the
near term to the longer-term implications of the restructurings and

-24-

12/17/91

other things that are going on, which could be a big plus
Nevertheless, it is another area of concern.

[over time].

When I put all that together along with what everybody else
has said, I can't take serious exception to the kind of forecast that
Mike has in the Greenbook or that of my own staff in New York, which
isn't all that different. But I think the band of uncertainty is
pretty wide, if for no other reason than that this confidence factor,
as John LaWare says, really is the wild card.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, there has been very little net
change in the economy in Texas and in the Eleventh District since our
last meeting.
It remains essentially flat with perceptions somewhat
worse than the numbers. A lot of those perceptions are not based on
local developments but on the continued drumbeat of national
This past week we got two
announcements of closings and layoffs.
One of Dallas' two newspapers, which was
local jolts to confidence:
The
112 years old, closed; then just the other day [unintelligible].
prime candidate is one that's in the Dallas area.
We've done a lot of surveying in the last few days on retail
sales, trying to pin down what has been going on during this Christmas
season. It's very hard to pin down, but on balance the conclusion is
that retail sales have not been too bad in the context of diminished
expectations. Most of the strength is in discount stores such as
Wal-Mart, Kmart, and Target; their sales seem to be up about 8 to 10
percent over last year. The conventional department stores and the
chain stores such as Penney's and Sears are not doing as well,
although their sales are up from last year, nominally at least, about
Penney's, which is headquartered in Dallas, says its store
5 percent.
sales are up about 5.3 percent over last year, but they report very
weak catalogue sales. And the reason they give is very interesting, I
think; it's because when they print a catalogue they can't take
account of price declines, so it becomes outdated and nobody uses it.
Let me give you a quick year-end report on Eleventh District
banking, because I'm pleased to report that in 1991 for the first time
in several years we have not led the nation in bank failures. We are
going to conclude the year with only 33 bank failures; that compares
to 105 last year and 144 the year before.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

How many are left?

MR. MCTEER. I might say that someone mentioned the timing of
A third of those that failed in '91 were
these banks' charters:
chartered in the '80s. The failing banks are getting much smaller.
The 33 in '91 had $1.4 billion [in assets] and the 105 in '90
accounted for $6 billion, whereas the year before it was $24 billion
and it gets bigger as you go back. After four years of aggregate
losses, 1990 was the first year of aggregate profitability for the
District banks, and that has continued into this year. But Eleventh
District bank lending has continued to decline on net, and the bankers
say that's because loan demand just isn't there. Property values are
beginning to stabilize after about six years of deflation. I mention
that because property values and banking trends still appear to be
moving in the other direction in many parts of the country, and I

12/17/91

-25-

guess the message from the Eleventh District is that that does not
augur well for a quick recovery.
On policy, I would just say that whenever we decide to take
the next step, I believe it's important that we do all that we think
is going to be necessary in the foreseeable future. Someone mentioned
a moment ago that discussions of the investment tax credit can freeze
capital spending. By the same token, I think expectations of still
lower interest rates in the future can cause a postponement of big
ticket spending as well. So, when we do decide to ease interest rates
further, I think we ought to ease enough so that the directive becomes
symmetrical and the probability of going one way is the same as the
probability of going the other way the next time a move is made. And
I would just comment that I would not consider lowering short-term
interest rates a little more to be a major easing move because of the
long period of very slow growth in M2.
I think our current de facto
procedure of targeting the fed funds rate and our pattern of small
frequent changes may have given us the impression that we were doing
more than we actually were on fundamental monetary policy. So, I
think there is room for a further reduction without derailing our
long-run objective of price stability.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, it's helpful to me as I look at
the economy to think in terms of two separate sets of factors working
together to retard economic growth. One is a cyclical set and the
other is a secular or structural set. And they march to entirely
different drummers, I believe. The cyclical factors are the usual
suspects that we find over and over again down through the years:
inventories, and so forth. I think they probably would have been
overcome by now--or maybe would never even have emerged--in the
absence of the structural problems that we have. The latter are much
more important and they are much stickier. And I think they are going
to have to be allowed to play themselves through to correction in the
interest of long-term growth and stability. I would mention the debt
overhang and several things that interplay one with another: the real
estate depression, the credit crunch in all of its different
manifestations, and the very large fiscal deficit, which has several
different kinds of perverse effects not the least of which right now
is the inhibition it provides to any counter-cyclical fiscal activity.
And then, of course, there is the restructuring and perhaps downsizing
in the services sector. Those are pretty powerful and pretty
important structural and secular trends that are going on. The policy
dilemma, as I would identify it right now, would be to allow these
structural problems to go ahead and correct. I think it would be a
mistake for us to try to abort them to the extent that we could.
Obviously, we want to cushion them, but I don't think we ought to try
to abort them. We should allow them to run their course and,
obviously, we all want to be careful that we don't lay a foundation
for future inflation. On the other hand, to the extent possible, we
certainly want to try to ensure against having economic activity fall
into a black hole, which I think haunts the back of our minds at this
point. And we also want to do what we can to [encourage] an
acceptably strong recovery as soon as possible.
Three sets of things go together with those conflicting
desires in the way of activity. One would be, obviously, the recent

-26-

12/17/91

weaknesses we've had in the economy; we've been over that and I don't
need to mention that any further. I do think it's important to stress
maybe a bit more than we have this morning the stimulus that is in the
pipeline from earlier monetary policy moves. The staff informed me
that as of yesterday we have approximately 3 percentage points at an
annual rate of stimulus in place right now for 1992 spread out over
the year almost equally from the first quarter through the fourth
quarter; it recedes a little by the fourth quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.
MR. PRELL.

That's on GNP?

Is it GNP or GDP, Mike?
It's the output that we're talking about.

MR. KELLEY. Right. At any rate, there is a lot [in the
pipeline] that is going to come along. That could turn out to be
either a salvation or, possibly even before it's all over, a problem.
If we ease further, that obviously ups the stakes on both sides of
that. Net, it seems to me that monetary policy has already done a
great deal. We have eased every month this year from January through
December with the exception of May, June, and July when there seemed
to be a recovery underway and we stopped. We started again in August,
in what I think was a very early recognition that things were not
continuing to go well. There's a great deal that the economy has to
do for itself in the area of these structural adjustments--things that
I don't see as being very susceptible to a useful assist from monetary
policy. It may be that we've done enough or very nearly enough in
terms of monetary policy now. I think that policy stability is an
important virtue in and of itself and that quick starts and stops in
policy are undesirable. And we could be getting close to setting
ourselves up for one of those cycles. So, my preference would be to
wait and see here. Obviously, if it appears that the economy is
continuing to slide, we'd have to take appropriate action at that
time. I do have to grant, of course, that there is a good case for
going ahead and easing. The economy has reached lower levels [of
growth] than I think many of us would have anticipated--certainly
lower than I anticipated. It's relatively low risk to proceed to ease
a bit more and it might help some at the margin. So, I would not
demur from an easing, though I would prefer to keep our powder dry for
a time at least.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Well, as a novice governor, I found this to be
a very, very interesting discussion. My knowledge is about the same
as what was contained in the Greenbook. The issue I would like to
reflect upon is simply what one does when confronted with the
I guess I've been not too long out of
Greenbook's statistical [data].
a classroom when I was temporarily domiciled in the First District.
MR. MULLINS.

It's a crowded District!

MR. LINDSEY. I'd point out that we have three Virginians
sitting here; my colleague was born in Richmond. What one would look
at first is the probability of being wrong, and I have no reason to
dispute the argument that the risks are equally weighted on the up
side and the down side from the Greenbook forecast. But I'd point out

12/17/91

-27-

that those are economic probabilities only. One never knows when
another Saddam Hussein might come along, when something might happen
in Russia or the Russias, or when something might happen in other
parts of the world. Those kinds of surprises, while we might wish
they were symmetric, probably are not symmetric; they are asymmetric
on the down side. The implication of that probability is not helpful
for solving our problem. On the one hand, if the risks are on the
down side, that might incline one to ease. On the other hand, if the
risks are on the down side, one might want to keep one's powder dry in
case those risks come true. So, on the probabilities side, I have no
answer.
One has to look at what the penalties are for being wrong on
either side. On the up side, if the economy turns out to be more
robust than we thought, the staff forecast suggests that we're going
to have decelerating inflation through '93 in any event. In fact, if
one looks at the labor market data, the big surprise is not that
unemployment is as high as it is but that the rate is as low as it is.
An analysis that we were presented with yesterday suggests that, using
the standard [econometric] model, we're not going to see unemployment
peak at 7 percent but at closer to 8 percent. We're fortunate that
that's not the case; but that suggests that there's probably more
labor market slack than otherwise. So, if anything, I would say the
upside risks are very, very low. I don't see the penalty for being
wrong, if the economy is stronger, as being very [large] on the
inflation side. I think the downside [penalty] is great. If one
looks at what could happen--really, we should compare the September
forecast with what we have now--the real downside risk is that we're
wrong by two quarters, just as the staff forecast was wrong roughly by
two quarters in September. That two-quarter error in the forecast of
when the recovery would start is 1-1/2 million extra jobs; it's $69
billion in lost output at an annual rate. And since that will
continue for about 2-1/2 years, the cumulative effect of that is a
large number even in Washington. Other downside risks include banking
problems--we know that there are weak banks out there--and, as Dick
Syron mentioned, fiscal policy. Whatever they do [on fiscal policy]
is not likely to be helpful, and perhaps we should think about
positioning ourselves to avoid the downside risks of extreme
Congressional action as opposed to modest Congressional action. So,
in conclusion, Mr. Chairman, I would say the probabilities may be
equally weighted. I would stress the penalties of being wrong. They
are very modest for stimulus; they're very great if we're too tight.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS. Thank you. I must say that, speaking toward
the end of this discussion, there's not much I can [add].
I would say
that the discussion has been extremely helpful, and it does portray
the very difficult balancing situation that we find ourselves in now.
I wish that some of the positive signs coming out of St. Louis could
have carried through a little further. The negative economic signs
that are portrayed in the Greenbook have been confirmed. If you make
a list of the negatives and of the positives, the negative list is
longer than the positive list. Nevertheless, the restructuring that
has been discussed around the table does lay a very good foundation.
Once we get through bumping along the bottom, I think we will be
poised to move up with stronger productivity, better efficiency in the

-28-

12/17/91

services sector, and so on.

And I do think the monetary aggregates

are showing signs of getting back on track.
So, we're in this balancing situation and, perhaps a bit like
Larry Lindsey, I've been trying to weigh what the penalties are on the
down side.
I haven't been in Washington that long but I am becoming

sensitive to the political pressures; there might be worse things
coming from the Hill or downtown--however one words it. Nevertheless,
I do come down on the side of accommodating this continued balance
sheet restructuring. From my perspective, David Mullins described the
monetary easing that has occurred very, very clearly. I think we do
[I don't know] whether the timing is right now
need some more easing.
or whether we should wait for a bigger bang, so to speak, to get that
maximum impact. I could be persuaded on that. Nevertheless, I do
think some easing at this time to continue the accommodation of the
[business] restructuring would be helpful. I'm afraid, unfortunately,
that I agree with the Greenbook that the economy is still likely to be
moving along the bottom for a while. So, some easing at this point
would seem to be helpful, but we're likely to need even more later on.
To the extent that we can do it earlier rather than later, I think
we're better off because if we go into the spring and we start to see
that black hole widen, we might start seeing more [unintelligible].
And about February is not a grand time to be seeing a panic situation.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm informed that coffee is here.
[Coffee break]

MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Questions for Don?

MR. BLACK. Don, I have been one of those who thought that M2
was flashing wrong signals. I even went so far as to say in one of my
more frivolous moments that it was as if I were experiencing colic
like a baby who has lost his pacifier. But looking at it now, as
Governor Mullins indicated earlier, it might not have been flashing
all the wrong signals. What has happened has been along the lines of
what you would have expected, taking it at face value.
MR. KOHN. I would interpret its signals as partly wrong and
I don't think we're getting the
partly right in the following sense:
extent of the damping in nominal income one would have expected from
the kind of money growth we've had, especially with interest rates
coming down. That should have boosted money growth and it didn't.
Essentially, we have had unchanged velocity for the year but one would
have expected a very sharp decline in velocity. So, I think we've had
some shift in the money demand function. That means that not all the
weakness shows through. At the same time, the forces affecting money
growth--the credit crunch type forces, to use the overarching phrase
here--clearly also have been affecting income. So, while not all the
weakness in money growth has shown through to income, it has been a
bit of a leading indicator, and I think that was true in 1990 as well
as in 1991 in terms of weakness in income. Now, we tended to discount
it in 1990 because the war intervened; the weakness in money was
followed by weakness in income but that was said to be because of the
war. Maybe looking back, the weakness in money should have been

12/17/91

-29-

telling us something about an underlying process in the financial
I wouldn't put percentage
system that was showing through to income.
point by percentage point M2 and income together; I don't think one
could do that.
But I do think M2 has had some [leading] properties.
MR. BLACK. I think that's a much better answer than the one
I suggested earlier.
You had warned us that there might not be
[unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don?
If not,
I, too, sense that there's
let me start off where Bob Black left off.
more to what is going on in M2 and that its weakness is more relevant
as it passes through to the economy than I would have been willing to
I think it's still obvious that
believe six weeks or six months ago.
a very big chunk of the M2 weakness is essentially structural; but to
the extent that it is in fact taking disintermediation out of the
system, it doesn't matter that it's structural; it's working there.
The only ways one can look at it as being non-relevant are either:
(1) through the displacement in mutual funds, which we've discussed;
or (2) that in many respects the sharp declines in small CDs in the
thrifts, for example, are not materially impacting home mortgage
lending largely as a consequence of the extraordinary degree of
securitization that has evolved in that market. But having said all
of that, we are still dealing with something that suggests that the
normal relationships between M2 and the economy are at least in part
holding, which also means algebraically that P* is still alive and
well. And if P* is alive and well, there is a good chance that the
Greenbook may be overestimating the level of inflation. And that,
frankly, is my impression. I do think that we're looking at success
in bringing the inflation rate down a lot faster than we had any
reason to contemplate. When one considers that there has been an
extraordinary rise in state and local indirect taxes--sales and other
indirect taxes that have been embodied in the price level--I think we
are getting a core inflation rate, ex-taxes, which probably is doing a
good deal better than we might readily grasp.
The economy is dead [in the water].
It's not decelerating;
It is true that industrial
we are not getting really major problems.
production is down in November and that, on the basis of the weekly
data we are looking at, it probably is going to be down in December.
We are clearly looking at some secondary inventory recession, which is
not atypical of previous pauses in past economic recoveries.
What is
really extraordinary about this particular period is what Jerry
mentioned:
namely, that in the context of a period not really all
that much different from a lot of pauses in the early stages of a
recovery, we have had such a dramatic drop in consumer confidence that
one would presume that something fundamental has really struck us.
We
are all puzzling about it and, as Jerry pointed out, no one really
knows exactly what happened. But let me throw on the table a possible
hypothesis based on an additional piece of evidence. A very
interesting survey came out last week as a Wall Street Journal/NBC
poll.
It indicated that the average consumer or voter--depending on
how you wish to look at it--perceived that the economy was terribly
important but that what should be done was not tax cuts for
themselves, or middle income income tax cuts, but tax cuts for
business.
Even the capital gains tax cut got the majority vote in
that context.
What clearly came through, as best I could see, is this
really very profound fear of the long-term economic outlook. What has

12/17/91

-30-

happened, I suspect, is that while the economy was coming back from
the recession, it led to a willingness on the part of the average
consumer to say essentially that it's coming back and that's okay.
But as soon as the balance sheet pressures put the wringer on this
recovery, I think there was an abrupt reconfirmation of their concerns
about whether the long term is really out there. They observed
increasingly that they are living in houses that are nowhere near the
quality of those that their parents lived in, even though their
parents may not have had the education or any of a number of other
[advantages] they have had. And they are worried about the future.
This situation creates a very
They ask:
Where is it all going?
profound fear.
I must say that I find the fact that the savings rate is as
low as it is in this particular context, frankly, slightly surprising.
I think there's a good chance that it may move up, which leads to a
conclusion that is an odd one in the sense that the economy isn't all
that far down. You can't account for the consumer psychology with the
But far more importantly you cannot
unemployment rate where it is.
account for the psychology with the layoff rate. The layoff rate is
basically not fundamentally different from what it was in other years
in the '80s, not even during the recessions. And initial claims,
adjusted for the [number] of those in the labor force, also are not
Therefore, something different is
showing anything really extreme.
It suggests that if this type of psychology
basically going on.
eases, it won't be all that difficult for a modest recovery to
resurface. And since it is not all that far from the top of a
recovery, the economy can probably come back pretty much in line with
the Greenbook forecast. But, as John LaWare points out, there is
something really fundamental involved here, psychologically. And it's
going to be difficult to break this general attitude easily, although
I do think that the balance sheet problems are probably now starting
to ease because the market itself is creating a very significant
countervailing force. We now have record equity issuance, which is
We have a significant volume of public
de-leveraging the system.
offerings of debt securities, a significant part of which are being
used to fund short-term liabilities, and that is taking off some of
the pressure. Lower interest rates, as Don mentioned, are having an
The market's
important impact on reducing debt service burdens.
courier system is working. And unless it cracks open, it probably
will proceed in that way and we will look back at this period a year
from now and say that we were unduly concerned. Frankly, that's my
best expectation. Indeed, I'm saying that I think the Greenbook
forecast is probably right.
As a consequence, as far as policy is concerned, my reading
in this context is that the majority of the Committee favors some
If that is in fact
further downward adjustment in the rate structure.
what the Committee chooses to do, that suggests that the Board will
have to determine how the discount rate should be structured to get
the maximum effect of the easing, especially in the context of this
psychology. What I would recommend for today is that we vote to go
asymmetric toward ease with a very strong presumption that unless
improvements in the economy become evident rather quickly or unless we
get significant evidence of a pickup in M2 in the period immediately
ahead, it would be expected that the Desk would be requested to move
lower. So, I would recommend an asymmetric directive, which I would
characterize as hard asymmetric; the balance of the evidence is going

12/17/91

-31-

to have to be that the economy is really showing surprising signs of
strength [to preclude an easing move].
There is a possibility that
things that have been extremely dull could become very buoyant very
quickly; were that to happen, I think we would want to stand pat. But
if that doesn't happen, the meaning of what I suggest is that we would
move lower. Governor Mullins.
MR. MULLINS.
I support your recommendation.
the right approach in the current environment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think it's

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation as I
interpret it, but I might go a little further. Let me say why.
If we
were to get the Greenbook forecast, with the turn, it might be not all
that uncomfortable.
But I'm afraid that the risks are not symmetrical
I really do think there's a chance we will get an
on the cost side.
outcome that would be highly undesirable. And then I ask:
What can
I don't
I don't believe policy is totally impotent.
we do about it?
think a lot of people do, given what has been talked about here. And
in that sense, I really do prefer maximizing the signal effect of what
we're doing. The first paragraph in the Bluebook says that following
the last meeting there was a "slight easing of monetary policy," which
it interprets as being a 25 basis point cut in the funds rate and a 50
If that's slight, I have some
basis point cut in the discount rate.
question about whether that's what we should be doing in this period
of time. We could always reverse [an easing move] if we were to get
I agree with your basic view that the most likely
happy surprises.
What I'm concerned
outcome is the one that is [in the Greenbook].
about is the risks that are on either side. So, for that reason, my
own personal preference would be alternative A.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOENIG.

President Hoenig.

I agree with your recommendation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I support your position.
I'd just
make a point that sounds absolutely preposterous in this environment:
Things could develop, even in 1992, where we could get surprised on
the up side.
That sounds ridiculous right now, but let's not forget
about that possibility.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I might say parenthetically that I
presume it would be the desire of this Committee to move with due
dispatch should that consideration arise. That has been the [stated
position] of this Committee previously. But it's important for us to
be aware that it may be necessary to preserve what has been really an
extraordinary success to date on inflation.
I must say, looking back,
that I think we've had some lucky things happen to us.
One of them is
that our policy has been able to rein in inflation at a much more
rapid pace than we had contemplated earlier. And it would be a shame
if we were to let that get away.
President Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would support your
recommendation. A point of clarification:
I assume you're talking
about a 1/4 point move?

-32-

12/17/91

If it
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. Let me put it this way:
turns out to be more than that, the implication is that other things
are going on and it would be appropriate under those conditions to
have a telephone conference.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, as I said, I would support your
I find myself in a bit of an anomalous position, as
recommendation.
someone who has been urging ease for over a year, to feel a little
uncomfortable with this position now. But that is because I think we
may have done enough at this point in time. We need to keep in mind
that there are very substantial lags in monetary policy and that
anything we do now is not going to affect the fourth quarter and is
not going to affect the first quarter. As I look at the profile of
the Greenbook forecast, I think it's not a bad outcome given no
additional restraint. And since my forecast for inflation is a bit
higher in the 1993 period, I'm just a little nervous about overdoing
this and making the kinds of mistakes we've made before. On the other
hand, the arguments for ease of the kind that you are describing
certainly are reasonable. We may get a very substantial psychological
benefit from moving. So, I would support the recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Jerry, if you think what you said sounded
To say I'm not worried about
preposterous, wait until you hear this!
the real side would be silly; I think one has to be. But at the same
time, I have the feeling that there's a limit to what monetary policy
can do on the real side and that whatever it can do is only temporary.
The permanent effect of our actions is really only on inflation. And
I'd have to say that policy has become very stimulative in the last
To gauge that, I look at reserves and I look at narrow
six months.
I do that because those are things we really affect through
money.
our actions. And both of those are growing at double-digit rates.
One can argue about what that means, Alan. But in terms of being
surprised about what happened to inflation, one of the things that we
When you came on, in
look at is a three-year moving average of Ml.
1987, that was over 11 percent; and in the next three years the threeyear moving average of Ml came down to about 3-1/2 percent or a little
less.
To us that indicated that the thrust of policy was very much on
a disinflationary course and we've seen that flow through. Now, what
worries me is that, given the actions in the last six months, that
trend growth rate has moved up a full percentage point. My guess is
that if we did nothing further, it probably would move up another full
percentage point in the first half of next year. And I worry about
I'm not sure we've stepped into the trap yet, but I
the long run.
think we're getting very close to making the same mistake monetary
policy typically makes at this point in the cycle in that we could be
sowing the seeds of the next inflation. Now, I don't disagree [about
I think we're going to see very good inflation
the near term].
numbers in '92 and we're probably going to see very good numbers in
What we're doing right now isn't really going to affect those
'93.
It
I think the effects are further out.
years in terms of prices.
I worry about setting up a
gets back to what Mike was saying before.
stop-and-go policy and putting us in a position where several years
down the road we're going to have to tighten dramatically. I think
the only chance of bringing inflation down in a permanent sense is
So, that's
through stable policy applied over a long period of time.
my longer-run concern.

-33-

12/17/91

In the shorter run, what I worry about is the risk in foreign
exchange markets.
I was struck by Gretchen's describing that earlier.
We have a fiscal policy that's in pretty tough shape; we're going to
be looking at deficits next year of 6 to 7 percent of GDP; and we're
going to be hearing a lot of political discussion about other measures
that might be taken on the fiscal side.
We could continue to have a
weak economy with that background music and we could find the dollar
under extreme pressure.
If at that time we are sitting here with a
monetary policy that is way out of position--and I'm arguing that I
think we're getting there fast--we could have a real problem next
year.
So, where I come out is that I would not be inclined to change
policy now. Obviously, that's not going to fly; I understand that
from our discussion, but that would be my preference.
What I would
argue for, assuming that we do make a change, is that we begin to
communicate in some fashion that monetary policy has done about all it
can because, if we don't start getting that message out there,
expectations and pressures and so forth are going to continue to try
to stampede us.
David, you talked a bit about this.
I probably
wouldn't favor doing it with as aggressive a step as you would, but we
And we need to do that relatively soon
need to get that message out.
or we're going to continue to get run over by these pressures.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I always feel very uncomfortable
when I disagree with Tom Melzer, and I'm partly with him because I
think we've done almost enough. But if we adopt your proposal of
moving [the funds rate] 1/4 point--and I would add a gratuitous bit of
advice to the Board of Governors that they couple that with a 1/2
point cut in the discount rate--I think, and hope, that the market
probably would conclude on its own that we've gone as far as we are
And some people will come out of the woodwork when they
going to go.
think rates have gone as low as they're going to go.
MR. KELLEY.

That's right.

MR. BLACK.
I would be a little more leery of taking that
second step because I think a 1/2 point move on the funds rate, even
if it's done later on, might look surprisingly close to these
ridiculous suggestions we've been getting with regard to fiscal
policy. I basically buy what you have suggested, but I share some of
Tom's nervousness that we're almost there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mr. Hendricks.

MR. HENDRICKS. Yes, Mr. Chairman. We come out just a bit
different from your recommendation, perhaps a little closer to Tom
Melzer. We acknowledge the potential for a no-growth economy this
quarter and next. But we don't believe further action by the Fed can
Neither
do a whole lot to counter the near-term weakness in output.
do we believe that the Fed can or should do much to offset the
structural imbalances in the economy that have been talked about
around the table here today:
real estate, the decline in defense
expenditures, debt overloads, and so forth. Apparently, M2 growth has
revived recently and might now be on an acceptable path that is close
to the midpoint of the target range. We've cautioned against a policy
oriented around a reaction to real-time economic data. History has
shown, it seems to us, that such a policy process can mislead

-34-

12/17/91

policymakers into thinking they can fine-tune these economic
activities.
Moreover, it seems to us that such a policy process also
leads policymakers to lose sight of the key long-term objective of
maintaining price stability. So, our policy prescription, while not a
whole lot different from your recommendation, is that the FOMC hold a
steady course at least for now until we see the cumulative results of
our several actions to cut interest rates over the past year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Don is a little concerned that maybe
what I said wasn't clear.
I'm saying that my recommendation is to do
I don't think that
nothing now but to have an asymmetric directive.
has been-MR. ANGELL. Yes, Bob Black I think stated it a little
differently, but that's the way I heard you.
MR. KELLEY.
MR. BLACK.

Yes.
I didn't hear it that way.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Oh no, I'm sorry.

You're saying "B" asymmetric?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

I'm sorry.

"B" asymmetric.

A hard asymmetric.

MR. BLACK. When you invoke the proviso, if you have to, you
would go 1/4 point and that's all?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
I'm sorry if there was any
confusion.
I'm recommending "B" asymmetric.
MR. BLACK.

I guess I'm the only one who is confused!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
sorry about that.
MR. BLACK.

No, apparently,

[I wasn't clear].

I'm

No, it's my fault.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I could accept "B" asymmetric.
I
would hope that [if and] when the rate is moved that it would be
accompanied by a change in the discount rate and that we would find
some opportunity to emphasize or highlight our longer-term objective.
In addition, I'd emphasize the point that we've made around this table
that it's important for us to be willing to reverse direction when
circumstances dictate. And I would like very much to disagree with
Tom Melzer, if I am understanding him correctly. I don't want to join
I think that's
this dialogue that monetary policy can't do any more.
wrong. There may be an issue of whether we should do any more, and
that's certainly a legitimate question. I hope we never join the
group that says that we're pushing on a string and can't do any more.
MR. MELZER.

I don't think I said that, Bob.

12/17/91

MR. PARRY. I think you said:
"We can't do any more."
I didn't hear what you said. What did you say?
MR. MELZER.
MR. PARRY.
MR. KELLEY.

Maybe

That we shouldn't.
Oh, I thought you said we couldn't.
Shouldn't, not can't.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I support your recommendation but
I do stand spiritually with Messrs. Melzer and Black.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN.
I, too, support your recommendation. The only
thing I would add at this point is that, while it's certainly
understandable that there's some frustration around the table in terms
of the results we've achieved to date--at least in terms of the real
economy and its tendency to fall below expectations--I think we should
resist the temptation to try to do something more dramatic and more
heroic.
I believe the course we have been on has been the right one
and I think we ought to continue with that.
As many people have
already commented, a lot of the problems we face are structural and
are not amenable to changes in monetary policy. And I think, as you
suggested, that we are not very far from where we want to be in any
event.
So, I'm comfortable with your recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. I would prefer alternative A.
I think there
still is a positive role that monetary policy can play both in terms
of healing some of these structural wounds as well as providing some
cyclical uplift. And given my reading of the downside risks and the
cost of being wrong, I prefer to get on with it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I can vote for your proposition,
as I'm sure you anticipated that I would. Thanks a lot for giving me
a chance not to have to write another dissenting statement! I do want
to suggest that during the last six years I've become a bit less
optimistic in regard to how easy it is to get the rate of inflation
down. When I came in, I had the view that inflation could be brought
down by gradual and persistent control of the money stock even if
unemployment is at its natural rate. My experience is that it's very
tough to get the CPI rate of inflation down. And I don't know why
we're looking a gift horse in the mouth. Here we have had some
unexpected occurrences, which means that the rate of inflation is
going to come down a little faster than we thought it was going to.
But we're committed not to let it turn into deflation. We're just not
going to let that happen.
I don't know, Mr. Chairman, whether there's
more pain doing it this way than there is doing it over a 10-year
period.
I feel quite confident that this improvement in the outlook
for inflation will make the recovery that we finally get a much better
and a long sustained one.
I do look forward to the discussions that I

12/17/91

-36-

think we might be having, particularly in regard to Governor Mullins's
comments, and I guess I get to vote again. So, thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Many times.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, my view doesn't change the tally
but I would have preferred alternative A.
I think we all are very
confused about the current stance of monetary policy, including me.
If it's narrow money that's important, it's too easy.
If it's shortterm interest rates that are important, policy is not as easy as it
seems; we have in this recession reduced the fed funds rate by a
smaller percentage than in previous recessions. And if broad money is
what is important, policy is too tight.
This is the first recession
in the last 30 years, I believe, where the rate of growth of M2 has
not increased during the recession.
If we believe M2 is the right M,
I believe the next move ought to be a
we need to be more aggressive.
1/2 point move because I think it's important that people stop
perceiving that every time we do something we're going to do something
else a week or two later.
The next time we move the perception ought
to be that we have done our thing and people should stop waiting for
the next shoe to drop.
People are out there trying to make decisions
--they want to buy a house or a car--and as long as they think there's
a little more [reduction in rates] to go they're going to be
postponing those decisions. When we do make a move, if it's correct
to do so, it's important that we emphasize the slow growth in M2
because I think that's the best way to set the stage for the time when
we're going to have to reverse the course and [raise rates].
And I
think M2 will be our most consistent explanation for changing course.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, given my concerns about the outlook
and the overall situation, I'd be very much in favor of doing more and
doing it now.
I'd be in the Syron/Boehne camp, supporting alternative
A. Having said that, as I hear your recommendation, the evidence of
economic growth would have to be very, very compelling in order not to
ease.
If I'm right about my interpretation of that and if the move
might be in the near term, then I support the recommendation. But if
I'm not right, I don't know how you can be more precise about exactly
what you mean in terms of the indicators that would cause you to do
something. If I'm not right in my interpretation, then I'd be in
favor of alternative A.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE.
I would prefer "B" with symmetric language.
I
really think that we have to send a firm sign that the [downward
interest rate] drift is going to stop.
That could have a very
stimulating effect because I think the economy and the public are
being exposed to something akin to Chinese water torture. We creep
down 1/4 point in the funds rate and then we creep down another 1/4
point and we change the discount rate.
If we follow that same
pattern, it seems to me that we are creating the expectation that that
pattern is going to continue almost indefinitely.
I think there's a
lot to be said for turning it off, at least for a while, and seeing
what happens.
I'm still not convinced that all of the effects of our
previous easings have come through and I don't see why we need to
continue this drift.
So, I would be in favor of "B" symmetrical.

12/17/91

-37-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Lindsey.

MR. LINDSEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm happy to be able to support
your proposal.
I am struck, however, by comments from people who are
disagreeing with your proposal on both sides.
The term psychology is
used by those who would not favor further easing and my good friend
John LaWare has just made the case against further easing but by
saying that water torture is going on.
So, there is a great deal of

sentiment at the table--and I'm struck by it--that we have not solved
the psychological problem by this proposal. That issue may have to be
revisited. But I am very happy to support your proposal, which I
thought was a very well crafted statement of the [FOMC'S] position.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Phillips.

MS. PHILLIPS.
I also am pleased to support the proposal.
could have gone further, but I'm happy to support this proposal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Alan?

I

Tom, did I miss you?

MR. MELZER. You don't want to hear that one again, do you
I'm "B" symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. He thought he wrote you down on a
piece of paper without [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I heard a long discussion but I
didn't remember how you actually came out.
MR. MELZER.

Well, I'm relieved.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. As I read it, the proposal on the
table will be "B" asymmetric toward ease with the new language that
Governor Kelley drafted earlier. I'd like Norm to read it.
MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions." Then, the new language would be as
on page 17 of the Bluebook-MR. KEEHN. Norm, at the risk of interrupting, which I'm
doing, could I ask the Chairman for just a bit more interpretation as
to what you really mean in terms of the indicators that would cause
you to do one thing or another? What would really make a difference
in terms of monetary policy?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Essentially, what I have in mind is that
if events do not change and if the quality of the outlook remains
unaltered from where we sense it today, additional ease would be
appropriate.
MR. KEEHN. Continuation of the current trends.
a time perspective in mind?

Do you have

12/17/91

-38-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, obviously we're dealing here with
a time-frame encompassing the period immediately ahead; we can always
have another meeting.
MR. KEEHN.

Two to three weeks or something like that?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I don't want to be [too precise].
couldn't disagree with you, but I'd hesitate to phrase it that
concretely.
MR. KEEHN.

I

Thank you.

MR. BERNARD. Continuing with the new language on page 17:
"In the context of the Committee's long-run objectives for price
stability and sustainable economic growth, and giving careful
consideration to economic, financial, and monetary developments,
slightly greater reserve restraint might or somewhat lesser reserve
restraint would be acceptable in the intermeeting period."
And then
coming back to the standard sentence, as shown on page 15:
"The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
growth of M2 and M3 over the period from November through March at
annual rates of about 3 and 1-1/2 percent, respectively."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Lindsey
Governor Mullins
President Parry
Governor Phillips

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Our next meeting is Tuesday and
Wednesday, February 4th and 5th of next year.
END OF MEETING

