Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
May 1, 1991

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman,
Simpson, and Slifman, Associate Economists
Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr.

Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Doying, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of
the Secretary, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Ms. Munnell, Senior Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston
Mr. Fieleke, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston

Transcript of Telephone Conference Call of
May 1, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Good morning, everyone.

I noticed that

the fact that we had a conference call yesterday was reported in The
Wall Street Journal this morning. It's important that what I'm about
to discuss not appear in the newspapers because this is highly
confidential information on the G-7 meeting and what led up to it.
If
we can't keep it confidential, we're going to have to find another way

to disseminate this sort of information in a more tightly held
procedure.

I'd be most appreciative if everyone could keep that in

mind.
The G-7 meeting that occurred on Sunday in many respects was

really the most interesting meeting I've attended in the years I've
been here. I think the best way to describe the meeting itself is to
start with Nick Brady's fairly extensive trip around Europe in which
he met with a very large number of private and public people--all the
finance ministers and a lot of bankers--and essentially was putting
forth his world interest rate scenario, of which I'm sure you're all
aware. As he was doing his visits he began to pick up what I think we
have been picking up: mainly, that there are increasing cracks
occurring in the underlying European system. And he takes that as
verification that things are getting increasingly bad. I think his
diagnosis per se is not all that inconsistent with what the events
are. But his solution--that is, seeking coordinated cuts in rates--is
creating a very significant backlash in Europe and abroad [generally].
Indeed, after he had a meeting in London with the finance ministers as
part of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development's
initiative, I got calls from
who had heard about what
was going on. And they were really quite disturbed. When the
Secretary got back and he started to think through the G-7 meeting, I
think he became aware that pushing coordinated [interest rate] cuts
was not going to make it and that it could very well turn out to be
unproductive. Nonetheless, there was an endeavor initially to have a
fairly gloomy communique, essentially suggesting significant cuts in
rates. The communique drafted by the deputies of the finance
ministers reflected this to a substantial extent, even though it was
filled with all sorts of graphics implying alternate types of wording.
The press had suggested, and I have no reason to disbelieve, that Mr.
Brady was getting support from the French, the Italians, and in a
limited, hesitant way from the Japanese. Indeed, when looking at the
early versions of the communique, which was constructed initially by
the deputies, the communique did not basically contradict that. Very
interestingly, what happened in the meeting is that the [support] of
people was really an illusion; in the event, the French, the Italians,
and the Japanese were really not supportive of Mr. Brady. They
weren't negative but they clearly did not in the discussions or in
dealing with the communique come out in favor of some of the language
he was supporting. The crucial one, for example, was that Brady was
supporting the substitution in the communique of "low inflation
This clearly would have been a
growth" for "non-inflationary growth."
major signal with respect to the position of the G-7. And there was
no support for that, as best I can judge.
We finally ended up with the operative policy statement even
though there was, in my mind perhaps properly, a lot of caution about

5/1/91

the outlook. Nonetheless, the operative policy statement was "Against
this background, ministers and governors emphasized the importance of
monetary and fiscal policies which provide the basis for lower real
interest rates and a sustained global economic recovery with price
stability. They believed that such a medium-term strategy was the
best way of reducing potential risks and uncertainties in the current
outlook." That operative sentence was written in the meeting and was
a substantial change from several of the earlier versions. The
pattern within the meeting on economic issues was not to convey a
sense of differences amongst the G-7 for fear of market responses.
There were considerable interventions by almost everybody that if we
came out of the G-7 meeting with an apparent significant split within
the meeting, it could be significantly counterproductive to the
marketplace. Basically, the notion that there could be a substantial
market effect if there were real dissension I think drew Mr. Brady off
pressing his position because I think he realized that the votes were
not fundamentally there.
In retrospect, what happened in [my] perception is that
probably has significant influence over the deputies and
probably brought to the table a somewhat stronger view of what the
support was for the United States Treasury position than was actually
held by the finance ministers themselves; I think that's what clearly
showed up. There was even the possibility that since there was a new
Canadian finance minister that the anti-Brady forces--the UK, Germany,
and Canada--might lose one of its members. In the event, that did not
happen; the Canadian finance minister was as strong as Michael Wilson,
basically, on that particular issue.
Prior to the meeting the Group of Seven went over to the
White House for coffee with the President, who was very cordial and
actually quite muted. He did indicate that he thought it might be
useful to have lower interest rates for world recovery but he gave a
sense of "I'm not too sure about what the dimension is and I certainly
wouldn't press a point with all of you experts," etc., etc. It was a
very soft sell. He did not, for example, pick out Germany, which had
been the center of the Treasury's pressure. All in all that meeting
went reasonably well, I think. The subsequent luncheon that we had
here at the Board for the G-10 governors indicated fairly clearly that
they were all rather relieved that the meeting came out the way it did
rather than the way a lot of us expected it might end up. And in that
meeting there was a general acknowledgement of the softening and the
problems that exist in the ERM. I indicated yesterday an increasing
desire on their part to have the deutschemark actually strengthen
within the ERM even though a number of them have been somewhat
relieved [in terms of their own economies]; because of the weakness of
the deutschemark they have been able to ease domestic interest rates,
especially in France. The result of that meeting, coupled with
meetings I had subsequently, is that the aftereffects of the G-7
I think there has
meeting have been, unfortunately, quite negative.
been a lot of cracked china in the process; I was dragged off to the
side on numerous occasions in the couple of days, with my colleagues-both finance ministers and governors--expressing their concern about
being pressured. I don't think there's any lasting problem there but
it was an episode that I don't think turned out as well as it could
have. But considering how bad it could have been, it was a major
improvement from the worst expectations.

5/1/91

I would say, however, that if the European economy starts to
erode and if problems in Germany get increasingly poor, and if our
economy fails to turn up, then I think there are going to be
significant changes in the G-7's general outlook.
I got the
impression that they were all quite nervous about the outlook but felt
it premature to change the official stance. And that could
conceivably be altered. In other areas, there was very little
discussion on exchange rates within the G-7 meeting. There was a lot
of discussion in the G-10 governors' luncheon on Monday. Aside from
rather vague concerns about the dollar being stronger than some of
them would like, there really was no notion or desire for intervention
or action in any particular way.
So, that issue at this moment is
dormant, I would suspect. But I do get the impression that if the
dollar were to run up to and through 180 on the mark, there would be
considerable pressure from the Bundesbank for us to do heavy mutual
intervention with the support of Europe and Japan. However, short of
that, I didn't sense much of an appetite for concerted intervention.
But I did sense that there would be a lot more should the dollar start
back up again, and my sense of it was that the desire for intervention
was stronger than anytime that I remember in the recent past.
There were a lot of other minor issues, [such as] strong
support for the Uruguay round; there was a lot of discussion on the
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe but nobody could figure out what to do
As a consequence, nothing emerged in the
to be helpful in that area.
communique of any moment. A lot of other technical issues were
discussed with respect to the IMF, specifically the Japanese request
Nobody even responded to that and it
to increase the amount of SDRs.
didn't get into the communique; there was basically no further
It was a
discussion. So, that's the general outline of what went on.
rather interesting set of meetings. I'm prepared to answer any
questions anyone has.
MR. ANGELL. Alan, I would understand and not be surprised by
But if we're to be in the
the desire that we buy D-marks at 180.
buying frame and we don't want our inventory of D-marks to grow
without limit, there would have to be some possible [hedge] in which
we would be able to sell D-marks.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, basically, I raised exactly that
issue with Poehl and suggested off-market reversals. He shook his
head; I don't know what that meant, but-MR. ANGELL. You mean he shook his head yes or no?
I interpreted
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. He shook his head yes.
Look, if we
that to mean that he'd be willing to take a look at that.
agree to intervene, I don't see how we can possibly accumulate any
more deutschemarks unless we sold them in off-market transactions.

at,

MR. ANGELL.
In other words, there wouldn't be an
say, 160 for us to be able to sell openly?

[opening]

But I would say
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, there might be.
that my desire, as you know, is just to get rid of them. Whether we
do that through the market or off-market transactions, I'm less
interested.

5/1/91

MR. ANGELL. Well, it just seems to me that someone needs to
work out with us some arrangement to make certain that we can get rid
of them if we are to buy them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, I think the Treasury is on board
for getting rid of them off-market. And so long as we have that
opening, then I think that's fine. If we have to sell--if we have to
be on both sides in the market--the only way we could do it is if the
dollar starts to plunge, in which case obviously we would sell. The
ideal way of getting rid of all that is try to take profits as the
market goes down.
MR. ANGELL. Well, of course we not only have that, we also
have the earnings on the D-mark and [unintelligible] that in itself-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but Sam is working on trying to get
rid of a lot of this. Sam Cross, are you on the call?
MR. CROSS.

Yes, I'm on the call.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
where that stands?

Could you bring us quickly up-to-date on

MR. CROSS. Yes. We have had some discussion with the
Germans about mechanisms and we have been looking at ways in which we
might find some opportunity to get rid of [these deutschemark
holdings] as conditions permit us to do so. There are a number of
technical and other questions to work out quite apart from the
question of the willingness of the Germans and possibly others to do
it. And we also are trying to talk to the Treasury to make sure that
this is something that they are interested in too. So, we're working
on it but I can't say that we have answers to it at this point.
MR. ANGELL. I just want to emphasize that if the United
States is more apt to be in an easing mode than other countries and is
ahead of other countries, then eventually our economy is going to be
cyclically stronger than other countries. And we thereby are going to
run into a period in which the dollar is very strong against the mark.
MR. CROSS. Well, that is certainly one of the things that
could greatly affect this. We have been thinking of various
possibilities, both on-market and off-market, and we've been
canvassing other central banks. We are trying to make sure we have
canvassed everyone and are trying to proceed to see if we can work
something out on this side. But, certainly, that's true. If exchange
rates move the other way, we can be a little more quick to try to
dispose of some [of our foreign currency holdings].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

Any other [questions]?

MR. MULLINS. How would you characterize the new Canadian
finance minister? Also, what is your assessment of the role that
Lamont of the United Kingdom played?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the Canadian finance minister, Don
Mazankowski, is still deputy prime minister. He is, as they say, a
self-made man. He has had no formal education as I understand it;
he's obviously very intelligent and sharp. And he walked into that

5/1/91

meeting as though he had been a steady member for quite a long period
of time. And there was very little loss of step between Michael
Wilson and "Mas," as they apparently call him. His economic
philosophy is the same as Wilson's; his basic argument is that they
have essentially committed themselves and have no intention of backing
down at this particular stage. He said it would be political suicide
for them, after having taken all the pain, to then throw in the sponge
before the results are there.
I got the impression that Lamont was
unhappy for very much the same reasons. My concern basically is that
I think
is pushing the Secretary and I don't get the
impression that the Secretary's general view is confrontational in
these types of meetings.
It certainly is not; he ran the meeting in a
highly non-confrontational manner, and considering the fact that I
don't agree with some of the positions that he was advocating, I
thought he handled himself exceptionally well. And he made as good a
case as one can make for what he was advocating. It struck me really
as quite a different sound than I was getting from the newspapers
It turns out, as
about his going around breaking china in Europe.
best I can judge, that it is
who has been pushing that; in part
I have a suspicion that the Secretary may be getting the rap for some
of that.
But all in all it turned out to be unnecessary friction, I
thought; it's not a big deal, but I think it could have been done
better. Any other comments or questions?
If not, thank you very
much, everybody.
END OF SESSION

