Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
June 24,

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

1991

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
Mullins
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, Associate
Economists
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Broaddus and Ms. Lovett, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond and New York, respectively

Transcript of Conference Call of
June 24, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The purpose of this call is to bring you
up-to-date on the contents of the G-7 meeting in London yesterday and

on a currency exchange between the Bundesbank and the Treasury and
ourselves. Let me first start with the G-7 meeting. While
discussions of the exchange markets were contemplated, the basic
thrust and expectation of the G-7 meeting was that it would be a
fairly detailed discussion of the Soviet Union and the options that
were available to the various members of the G-7, with the hope that
the finance ministers would have an early shot at a number of the
proposals that had been running around. The objective was that by the
time the finance ministers joined with the heads of governments and
the foreign ministers at the Summit in London in a few weeks, there
would be a little more discussion of economics and finance and at
least a modicum less of politics. As a result of that, there was an
endeavor essentially to clear the communique in the sense that in
previous meetings a substantial amount of time was involved in
discussing the communique and in many meetings the thrust of the
meeting really was governed by structuring that communique. As a
consequence, rather than find that we were spending all of our time on
non Soviet-related issues, a communique was set up that was
essentially pre-cleared. And I use the word "essentially" in the
sense that all the deputies, with the exception of the Brits who had a
minor exception, had signed off.
In the event, regrettably, there were lots of second thoughts
about the content of the communique, and while [the discussion of] the
document was not as combative as at previous meetings, we nonetheless
spent a goodly part of the time on that, especially in the areas of
foreign exchange. The most important issues from our point of view
were in this area. The basic thrust of the Europeans and to a
slightly lesser extent the Japanese was that the dollar was moving too
high and creating significant problems for them. I would say without
exception that the general view of the six was that the dollar was at
the outer edge and that something in the way of intervention was
clearly called for. The general view of the group, however, is not
essentially interventionist even at this particular stage. What was
most interesting about the discussion was that whereas in previous
meetings Secretary Brady and Karl Otto Poehl often would take
differing positions on intervention--with Poehl basically consistent
with our view that there should be little, if any, and Treasury
officially on the side of a lot--in recent months that has changed
quite dramatically and the most formidable ally of Brady turned out to
be Poehl.
The real problem in the basic discussion of exchange rates
occurred as a consequence of a very serious and formidable attempt by
whose purpose was to try to lock in not
only strict intervention but, if he possibly could, even ranges. The
particular language that he was employing for purposes of discussion
in the context of a communique was to stipulate in effect that further
increases in the value of the dollar would be counterproductive--a
term used previously in communiques, often as a prelude to significant
currency intervention. We
largely
resisted that at some length to a point where
actually
threatened not to sign the communique. All of us were really quite

6/24/91

-2-

concerned that that in fact might end up being the case; and that, of
course, would be the big news.
Nonetheless, it was highly undesirable
to acquiesce in some of what he was endeavoring to create, and
eventually at the end he backed down as
came up with
language that was in between the somewhat stronger language of
and our desire not to get too closely tied with the words
"stabilization," which was another alternate formulation of the
potential focus of intermeeting exchange rate policy.
came
up with a concept in which they talked about "orderly markets" or,
earlier on, "orderly and stable" markets. But "stable," according to
Brady, was too close to "stabilized" and he argued strenuously for
"orderly" and finally won the day.
did back down and the
communique came out as many of you probably have seen it.
The major interesting issue, as we learned at various times
in the meeting, was that the Europeans particularly were concerned
about the status of the Soviet Union--fearful of a major breakdown and
as a consequence some considerable weakening of the mark with major
pressures within the ERM. And to a substantial extent I would expect
that their concerns relevant to the issue of the rise in the dollar
[reflected] a fear that this was only the beginning and that there
would be substantial further increases that they judged would be
counterproductive to their recovery largely by producing inflationary
pressures that they felt they would have difficulty containing.
Nonetheless, when the discussion finally terminated on the exchange
rate issue, there was a general agreement that to the extent that
there was intervention at any particular time it was not going to be
preannounced in the communique and that to whatever extent it occurred
it presumably would be modest. There was, with the exception of
The Japanese, who are
acquiescence in that.
concerned that anything over 140 on the dollar/yen exchange rate would
be a problem for them, were not as concerned as the Europeans but
nonetheless would have been fully supportive of any language that
stipulated that further increases in the value of the dollar would be
perceived to be counterproductive.
We finally got that element of the communique out of the way
and went on to discussions of the Soviet Union, which had been going
on before and [continued] after [the meeting].
And the most
interesting aspect of that discussion was that, despite the fact that
a number of individuals in the group had said to me privately that
they were very concerned about the state of the Soviet Union, when I
raised the issue of potential hyper-inflation taking hold there was
In the discussion there was a much softer response;
[some] dissent.
even though there was considerable discussion about there having to be
conditionality on any assistance funds to the Soviet Union, there was
little in the way of trying to formulate what such conditionality
would mean. What would it mean in effect to have Article IV
discussions with the Soviet Union and get into a position where the
They
IMF would insist that certain basic statistics and goals be met?
talked as though it were Argentina or Paraguay or even Mexico. But
the difference that would prevail with the Soviet Union is clearly one
which is of a monumentally different order and raises a whole series
of questions about whether there is a reasonable concept of
conditionality with respect to economic programs for the Soviet Union.
There was a strong desire to support reform but a recognition that
there seems to be a degree of naivete in the ruling circles of the
Soviet Union, and no one is quite sure whether all of this is not

6/24/91

significantly premature. At the end of the day I at least came away
with the view that there is a general awareness that aid will be
forthcoming and it was more a concept of political aid than it was
economic aid because no one really wanted to get down to hard economic
issues to the extent I thought we were going to.
And I thought the
meeting ended basically with little indication other than support for
special status [for the Soviet Union] at the IMF; I was surprised it
came out that way because I thought we were trying to avoid preempting
anything of that nature from the Summit.
MR. TRUMAN. It had been announced. The President announced
his proposal in December and Baker had it in his speech last week.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes, but I found a little surprising but
not unexpected that all the members basically were supportive of it.
All in all, it was a meeting which I think underscored growing concern
in Europe because of the Soviet situation and growing concern about
the weaknesses of their currencies. The Germans, obviously, are
concerned about strong wage increases, which are possibly engendering
inflationary pressures. And I sense that there was a greater element
of confidence that if the Soviet Union doesn't fall apart and all
other things are equal, Europe will hold together.
told
me in a private meeting that they thought their economy had improved
since April--or more exactly since the conversation I had
a
couple of weeks ago with [unintelligible.]
But while the tone was
somewhat more supportive of recovery, I had the sense that there was a
jitteriness amongst that group, which probably reflects to a large
extent the deterioration of the Soviet system [unintelligible].
Before I go on to the second related subject, I thought I
would just open up [the floor] for any questions.
If there are none-and assuming that everyone is still on the line--I'd like to discuss
for a minute an issue that, as all of you know, has been on the
discussion agenda for quite a while with the Bundesbank going back to
the beginning of the year:
The potential of an off-market swap for
dollars and DM on the grounds that our [foreign currency] balances
have gotten exceptionally large, which is a view concurrently held by
the Bundesbank. We have been involved in somewhat passive discussions
on this issue for quite a while.
It picked up a couple of weeks ago
and reached fruition in the last several days.
I thought I would ask
Sam Cross if he wouldn't mind trying to give us a little background on
the development of the program and its specific details.
Sam?
MR. CROSS.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you say, this matter
of reducing the foreign exposure resulting from these currency
balances is one that the Committee members have been expressing some
interest about for some time. We have been working with the Treasury
and the Bundesbank to try to come to a satisfactory solution. The
plan that we've worked out with them is to exchange over a period of
time a total of 10 billion deutschemarks that the Treasury and Federal
Reserve are holding for equal value of the Bundesbank's dollar
holdings. We would make these exchanges at market rates but in offmarket transactions. The first exchange, which will be for 4 billion
deutschemarks against an equal value of dollars, is scheduled to be
made tomorrow for settlement on Thursday. The overall understanding
that we worked out also calls for six subsequent exchanges of 1
billion DM each on a particular agreed date, one in each month over
the second half of this year. These six exchanges are to be

6/24/91

transacted at forward rates for those particular dates as those rates
are calculated tomorrow. We will calculate them on the basis of
tomorrow's [exchange] rate and the interest [differentials.]
Now,
this arrangement was agreed to in principle with the Bundesbank and
the Treasury last Friday. It essentially will mean that we will be
exceeding the daily and intermeeting limits. The transaction was
cleared with the Chairman and the Foreign Currency Subcommittee in
accordance with the Committee's Procedural Instructions. We also have
agreed with the Treasury that 60 percent of the mark balances to be
exchanged will come from the Federal Reserve balances and 40 percent
from the Treasury's ESF.
It should be noted in this connection that
the Federal Reserve balances are currently substantially larger than
Treasury's.
So, the particular allocation will tend to make them
But I should also emphasize that the entire
somewhat more equal.
arrangement must be kept completely confidential at the present time.
The Bundesbank is profoundly concerned about possible adverse market
perceptions from any kind of premature disclosure or from discussion
or misunderstandings in the market about the purposes and implications
So, at the present time it's very important that
of this exchange.
there not be any comment about this arrangement.
That completes my
comments, Mr. Chairman.
I might say further that since there
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
will be a possibility of inferring that something is going on, we
prepared, with the Bundesbank's agreement, a way to handle questions
that might occur should the particular transaction become transparent.
The first sign that will appear in any published data will be in the
daily Treasury statement, which I suspect comes out on Monday.
MR. TRUMAN.

Thursday.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. CROSS.
MR. TRUMAN.

On Thursday it's closed.

I believe it comes out Friday, Mr. Chairman.
Friday.

My recollection is that the
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Friday?
last time we did something equivalent to this off-budget there were
several analysts who were able to work through the daily Treasury
statements, specifically in the asset and liability accounts, to infer
a transaction that is atypical. I would suspect, since this is not a
In any event,
negligible quantity, that it might well get picked up.
next Thursday we will be publishing our balance sheet and [the change
in] "other assets" will reflect that in part.
So, we may well get a
In any event, the general answer will be of this
set of queries.
form:
that the Bundesbank, the ESF, and the Fed felt that their
respective operating balances were excessive [relative] to their needs
and that it would be to our mutual interest to engage in an exchange;
that this issue has been under discussion for quite a long number of
months and finally reached fruition this week; it is not a reflection
of the United States endeavoring to dump D-marks; it is a technical
issue. We hope it will be answered in a manner that is not disturbing
Eventually, of course, the full transaction will be
to the markets.
published; is that in early September, Sam?

6/24/91

MR. CROSS.
Yes, we give a report in September, which
probably will cover the entire transaction, even though some of the
transfers will not have been made.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I just want to emphasize what Sam has
said:
It's very important that no mention of this transaction be made
unless and until it appears in the public prints with official
statements affirming it.
Are there any questions for Sam?
I have two questions.
MR. HOSKINS Yes, this is Lee Hoskins.
It's not clear to me, Sam, what if any impact this has on profit and
loss for the System, at least initially. And secondly, is part of the
agreement associated with this swap that we will continue to intervene
in marks if necessary?
MR. CROSS. Well, on the first, the only implications for
profits or loss are that we hold a smaller amount of marks than we
held otherwise and, therefore, we are less subject to either gains or
losses resulting from changes in the mark/dollar exchange rate in one
direction or another.
MR. TRUMAN.

Well, we also will realize a small profit.

MR. CROSS.
And we realize a profit.
For the Treasury,
there's a loss on some of the [deutschemark] transactions that we are
undertaking. On the Federal Reserve side we will realize some gain
because we will in effect be selling these marks at rates that are
more favorable than the rates at which we bought them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Sam, I understand from the Treasury that
their effective cost on the part of the transaction that will occur
tomorrow is 1.86 and that unless there's a remarkable change over
night they're going to show a small profit.
MR. CROSS. You may be right; my numbers are slightly
different, but they may not be up-to-date.
MR. TRUMAN. That's right, Sam. I thought I had understood
something different as well, but they may have some other way of doing
their accounting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. CROSS.

Barry Newman told me they're using 1.86.

In that case they will make a profit as well.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. CROSS.
On the second [question], in any conversations
that I have had with them we were reassured that there is not any quid
pro quo in terms of a policy move--that this particular transaction is
a cooperative move by both of us and it does result in improving
[unintelligible.]
There was not, as far as I was concerned, any quid
pro quo in that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I think that's right, Sam. There
were bilateral discussions about this in London with the Germans and
the general agreement was that if we had very heavy operating
balances, it would limit the extent to which we could engage in mutual

6/24/91

intervention. But even with this, it was clearly indicated that we
were not engaging in this transaction in order to get some leeway for
massive on-market accumulation of marks. That issue, I think, was
clearly stipulated and there was no indication or request from
for anything else.
The impression I got actually is
that
was more concerned about the possibilities of some problems
with the Summit, which might require some modest intervention. But he
is not one who is enamored about significant amounts of intervention
as a means to alter any important move in the currency.
So, I would
merely underscore what Sam has just said.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, would it not be also true that
even though our realized profit is a positive, the fact is that in
1991 we have some unrealized losses that will be made permanent?
MR. TRUMAN. We mark-to-market every month; in fact, those
losses, if you want to put it that way, have already been [taken].
MR. CROSS.
reflected.

Our losses earlier this year have already been

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's right.
The Treasury's receipts
for the year from the Fed will be considerably lower than normal. But
then again, they were considerably higher than normal last year. Any
further questions for Sam? Any further discussion on any issues?
If
not, thank you very much, everybody.
END OF SESSION

