Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
August 5, 1991

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
Mullins
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, R. Davis, Promisel, Siegman,
Simpson, Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Madigan, Assistant Director, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, and Ms.
Lovett, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Cleveland,
Kansas City, and New York, respectively

Transcript of Conference Call of
August 5, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I would ask Don Kohn to update us.

MR. KOHN. As you know, M2 was extremely weak in July; we are
looking at about a 3-3/4 percent annual rate of decline.
That
compares to a 5 percent increase that we expected at the time of the
Bluebook. June, as you know, also was weak, at only about a 1 percent
rate of increase.
Quite frankly, we're getting off on such a slow
foot at the end of July that we've marked down our August growth to
only about 1 percent, trying to take account of the fact that the last
few weeks of July seemed so sluggish.
So, we have several months here
of very slow growth--much slower, obviously, than we were expecting
but also than was projected by the models. We've looked at this in
many different ways in terms of the various components relative to our
expectations. We do have liquid deposits still strong but their rate
of growth has come down a bit, and I'm including in this Ml.
Ml is up
at a rate of only 1-3/4 percent in July, down from 9-1/2 percent in
June. But also savings and money market deposit accounts, while still
growing at double-digit rates, are growing less rapidly than they did
in June.
Eurodollars and overnight RPs have fallen short of what we
were expecting. And the runoff in retail time deposits, which we
thought might begin to [moderate] a little as balance sheets were
restructured, continues unabated. We have about an 11-1/2 percent
decline in retail time deposits in July; that's about what it was in
May and June, so there's no letup there. And as the liquid deposits
grow less rapidly that's showing through into overall M2. We've
looked at this by region and we can find nothing unusual. We've
looked at it by size of bank with the same result. We've looked at it
by personal versus nonpersonal deposits where we have some data. We
can't slice up M2 into personal versus nonpersonal [components] but we
do have money market deposits accounts and a few other pieces of M2
that we can look at in that way.
And there doesn't seem to be unusual
behavior there, although we're still looking at all these things.
Part of the weakness, of course, could be in the scale
variables; that is, income and growth are probably a little weaker
than we had expected when we were putting the Bluebook together. But
it doesn't come close to explaining an 8 or 9 percentage point
shortfall in July M2 growth relative to our expectations.
So,
obviously, most of it is in a portfolio shift of some sort.
Primarily, this looks like a portfolio shift [that involves a move]
out on the yield curve--out of [retail] time deposits into longer-term
assets and particularly into bond and stock mutual funds, especially
bond mutual funds.
But also we're seeing some pickup in
noncompetitive tenders in Treasury auctions.
So, we think people are
investing directly in longer-term assets as well. Another aspect of
the portfolio shift we are in the process of looking at is whether
people are re-balancing their assets and liabilities.
That is, credit
growth has been very slow, and it could be that to the extent people
are spending, they're doing it by holding down the growth of, or even
drawing down, M2 assets rather than accessing consumer credit.
The
Mortgage and Consumer Finance Section in our R&S Division has been
looking at models of consumer credit and looking at those in different
ways trying to see whether consumer credit growth has been slower than
one might have expected.
So far, unfortunately, the results are
ambiguous.

8/5/91

Any shifts either out on the yield curve or away from M2 in
terms of spending and away from credit would be encouraged by low and
declining [retail] time deposit rates.
These rates actually are not
that low relative to what our models are predicting, given the decline
in market rates we've had. But they have been dropping very rapidly,
and we think there are some aspects of the returns people get on
deposits that aren't captured by these rates--that is, fees seem to be
higher. Many banks are beginning not to pay interest, for example, on
the 12 percent of NOW account balances that they say they're putting
[aside to meet] reserve requirements.
So, there are ways that banks
have of reducing the return to depositors that may not be captured
entirely in these rates. We don't know of anything that has happened
I think these are
suddenly in the last two months or three months.
trends that have been occurring over time. Of course, banks don't
need the deposits; bank credit growth continues to be quite sluggish.
We have preliminary estimates for July, and these estimates I'm
reading you abstract from some distortions to the data caused by the
sale to Fleet Norstar of Bank of New England, as a result of which the
FDIC ended up with an awful lot of assets. Abstracting from the
FDIC's [acquisition] of these assets, we're looking at essentially
flat bank credit in July. We have loans declining 2-1/2 percent;
business loans declining 4 percent; and even a drop in real estate
It's very rare that
loans at banks, and that's extremely unusual.
that number goes down. So, bank credit remains quite weak and banks
are not looking for deposits. Looking at deposit growth by bank
capital and bank loan-to-asset ratios, it does look as if the weakest
deposit growth is in the least well capitalized banks with the lowest
loan-to-asset ratios.
So, there is some correlation between not
making loans and declining retail deposits.
What is the meaning of this portfolio shift?
It's somewhat
ambiguous.
This is obviously the difficult question. I don't think
one can dismiss it out of hand. A lot of weakness in M2, an aggregate
that leads income developments, occurs because of portfolio shifts.
For example, if the Fed tightens up, in the first instance rising
market interest rates cause shifts out of M2 into market securities
and then later on that affects spending. So, just because [the
initial effect] is a portfolio shift doesn't necessarily mean that it
On the other hand, if it's a
can be ignored for policy purposes.
portfolio shift in which preferences of asset holders have changed for
some reason, then it would be misleading to pay a lot of attention to
Clearly, people are reaching for
it.
So, the meaning is ambiguous.
Are long rates so high that they would
yield. One question would be:
damp the expansion?
On the other hand, an explanation for that is
that they got high because the economy was expected to expand--that
If M2 is damped because time
that's how the yield curve got so steep.
deposit rates are dropping, that might indicate continuing credit
restraint, which we couldn't ignore.
Another aspect of the staff's [analytical effort] is some
more work being done with semireduced-form VAR type models, lead-lag
models, trying to refit those things to see, after a few years in
which we haven't paid much attention to them, whether Ml and M2 lead
nominal income or real income--even when you include interest rates
and other variables in them. We do see some power in the non-M1 part
of M2 even when you include interest rates in these equations, which
also suggests that one might treat continuing weakness of M2 with a
little caution here in that it perhaps may have some effect.
An issue

8/5/91

that has arisen recently is the question of whether stronger Ml growth
should be a comfort to the Committee. As you all know, we dropped M1
targeting because the aggregate had become so interest sensitive that
its velocity swung over a very wide range very rapidly. So, Ml is not
far off of its demand curve, although it appears to be coming in weak
in the third quarter relative to expectations. But it has not proven
to be a good policy indicator since the early '80s when deposit rates
were decontrolled.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thanks very much, Don.

Questions for

Don?
MR. CORRIGAN. Alan, is Mike Prell there
he's looking at the real economy?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[to comment on]

how

Yes, he is.

MR. PRELL. Well, at this stage, we're just beginning to put
together a forecast for the next FOMC meeting. The data of late have
been mixed. On the whole we don't feel they have been as robust as we
would have expected if we are to get the almost 5 percent GNP growth
we had for the third quarter in the last Greenbook. Thus, I would
anticipate very tentatively that we will be marking that down
significantly to probably something more in the neighborhood of 3
percent.
But we're having to sift through some data that don't fit
together very neatly. And there has just been such great volatility
in the labor market data in particular, which are usually one of our
most important guides, that it's very hard to read at this stage.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Don or other

staff?
MR. HOSKINS.
Don, this is Lee Hoskins. Maybe I missed it,
but did you give a third-quarter projection and where would that leave
us year-to-date in terms of the target ranges?
MR. KOHN. For the third quarter we have M2 on a quarterly
average basis barely growing; that is, it's essentially flat.
For Q4
to July we're estimating 2-3/4 percent growth; Q4 to August, given
that 1 percent growth projected for August, is at about 2-1/2 percent,
which is the lower end of the range.
MR. MCTEER.

Bob McTeer in Dallas for Don.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MCTEER.

Go ahead, Bob.

What about bank reserve growth?

MR. KOHN. Well, bank reserve growth has been somewhat
stronger because Ml, particularly in June, was stronger. But total
reserve growth also has tailed off in July. We have it expanding 1
percent in July following very rapid second-quarter growth. But that
follows Ml, obviously, which is the only aggregate that has any
reserves against it anymore.
So, it comes back to the issue of how
much weight to give Ml which, in fact, has been strong partly because
of currency, but partly because demand deposits and NOW accounts have
been strong. However, Ml is tailing off a bit in July.

8/5/91

MR. PARRY. This is Bob Parry. You talked about bank credit
Some numbers I've seen with regard to insurance companies
growth.
suggest that they're providing credit at a weak rate as well.
Do you
have any information on other sectors and what is happening in them?
MR. KOHN. Not really. Once again, that's something we would
do for the FOMC meeting; we will go through the whole credit picture.
We haven't really updated that since the last meeting. You'll
remember that credit growth was projected to be very sluggish in the
second quarter. We have very, very little information even about the
second quarter.
So, we haven't seen a pickup there yet.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

MR ANGELL. Mike, do you have a preliminary view on how you
see the rate of inflation in the second half of 1991 as compared to
before?
Does this reassessed picture also give you a view of some
improvement?
MR. PRELL. Again, it's a mixed picture in the recent data.
In the most recent figures on the wage side, for example, we got a
nice figure on average hourly earnings in July after a string of very
That was some comfort but the employment cost indexes
bad numbers.
On balance, they were
for the second quarter were not favorable.
higher than we anticipated. So, the labor cost picture doesn't appear
In the other price data, for
to be evolving in a more favorable way.
I
food and energy prices there are likely to be some adjustments.
don't think we see a materially different picture at this point for
the second half than we had before.
It's still a relatively moderate
rate of inflation, something in the 3 to 4 percent range, for the
second half.
If I may return for a second to Bob Parry's
MR. KOHN.
question:
I'm now looking at a table on long-term debt issuance and
it does look as if that has tailed off; both debt and equity issuance
by nonfinancial corporations tailed off in July. Actually, it peaked
around April or May and has gone down since then.
It's down fairly
robustly, particularly on the equity side relative to recent years,
So, it's not supplementing
but it is also off [on the debt side].
bank credit the way it was, say, in April or May.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Don?
If not, I
think it would be helpful to all of us to exchange views specifically
on insights into the causes of these developments. The floor is open
for comments from anybody who wishes to add to our state of knowledge.
I don't think
MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne, Mr. Chairman.
I can add any more insight to Don's comments in terms of technical
But I'd like to suggest that at
aspects of what might be going on.
least part of what we're seeing in M2 is a reflection of the state of
the economy.
Increasingly, this recovery just doesn't have a good
feel to it.
The reports that I'm getting from the business community
across a broad front suggest that the recovery isn't going anywhere.
I had a board meeting last Thursday and I must say that the sentiment
I think we're
there was more apprehensive than it was some weeks ago.
seeing some of the inventory impact here, where we're moving from

8/5/91

inventory liquidation to perhaps a bit of accumulation, and that's
helping some in manufacturing. But when you get beyond manufacturing
into retailing, into construction, and you talk to bankers who deal a
lot with the middle market where much of the employment is in the
economy, it just isn't ringing the way it ought to as far as having a
healthy economy. If you look at the labor numbers that we got on
Friday, I think they are telling us something that is contributing to
this story of a recovery that doesn't have a good feel to it.
And in
the context of what is going on in the real sector, even though there
is ambiguity and we can't reach definitive conclusions about what is
going on in money, I think the money supply is telling us something.
I, for one, think that the cost of additional insurance in terms of a
modest easing is very low; and I think the risks are growing on the
side of a much weaker economy than any of us anticipated. We ought
not to overlook that in our technical analysis of the money supply.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal.
I want
to pick up on what Ed said. We certainly don't see anything in this
part of the country that can help explain the causation of the
weakness in the money supply. However, I would say that over the past
three to four weeks I've had many telephone calls from business people
around the District--and these are people who for the most part have
business not only here in the Southeast but around the country. And
the question they're asking me basically is:
Where are these numbers
coming from that they're seeing?
They are reporting that they just
don't see any real recovery in their own businesses and in the
businesses of their colleagues. True, they say there is not a
continuing deterioration, but things are very, very flat.
Businesses,
particularly small businesses, are reporting that credit continues to
be very difficult to obtain. Manufacturers are saying that orders are
not really increasing at the rate that they had expected. Really, I'm
repeating what Ed's contacts have been telling him:
that the recovery
seems to be much slower than expected--or at least than I expected.
Bankers are reporting that loan demand is virtually flat; and that, of
course, has some bearing on the performance of the money supply as
well.
So, I'm not sure that an easing of monetary policy at this time
would help very much in terms of the money supply because it seems to
me there is an awful lot of liquidity out there anyway. But the
psychology, at least from the people that I've talked to, is not good.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Parry.
I'd like to
admit that what I've been hearing from business people throughout the
Twelfth District has taken on a somewhat more gloomy tone.
The one
thing that I'm not sure I fully understand is whether this is an
unusual reaction, if indeed we are at the trough of the cycle. I'm
not sure that in the past business people really have been very good
forecasters of a turnaround. The other point I'd make is that as far
as the banks in our District are concerned, particularly the large
ones, the thing that continually is cited is that, as I'm sure you
know, they had some very disappointing results as far as their profits
are concerned in the last quarter. And many of them are talking about
the pressures they've received from the regulatory side; and they
appear to be sitting on their hands in terms of what they think is
likely to happen with regard to business over the next three to six

months. I don't know to what extent that translates into their
decreased appetite for attracting liabilities. I know Don indicated
that there's no explanation by region or size of banks, but I've not
seen them quite this pessimistic throughout this entire cycle.

8/5/91

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, this is Dick Syron in Boston. I
just want to support what Bob Parry said.
It's critical with respect
to the banking sector.
I think as one might expect, at least in this
part of the country-MR. KOHN.

Dick, could you speak up, please?

MR. SYRON.
I said that at least in this part of the country
among the bankers there is still a very strong fear factor, both in
terms of growing pessimism about the robustness of the recovery and
We have seen in several
also of concern about the regulatory side.
cases differences in how our regulators would approach individual
credits compared with the Comptroller, for example. All of this is
contributing to a sort of bunker mentality on the part of lenders, who
hope that they can ride it out with enough capital until things return
to normal.
I would just add that in talking to a number of insurance
companies in New England, they are also being very cautious on new
commitments and are taking steps to assure that they have absolute
liquidity. Now, that may be something that has more [unintelligible]
as an explanation of what is happening to [money growth].
I think most of you know that my
MR. ANGELL. Wayne Angell.
view of the commodity prices has been that they've been pretty well
flat.
But it seems to me that that really hasn't changed, and
particularly it hasn't changed in regard to our experimental index on
commodity prices ex food, fiber, and energy. And I think taking out
food, fiber, and energy helps if what you're trying to do is assess
the impact of the money growth that you're getting on an auction bid
process.
In recent weeks this experimental index has really taken a
In fact, Alan, you remember last week I said I didn't
nose dive.
understand why the price of gold wasn't falling and I guess lo and
behold gold prices did catch on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

They did.

MR. ANGELL.
I think that is important for two reasons. One,
as most of you know, I've had the lowest real growth rate projection
for the economy in '91 and '92 of any member among the presidents or
the Board.
So, it's not that I thought we had a strong recovery
anyway, because ordinarily we get faster money growth and we also get
some upward movement in commodity prices as recoveries take place.
But the problem, as I see it, is that our conventional ability to
alter the opportunity cost of holding M2--that power--has slipped away
from us a little and the whole yield curve in some ways is competing.
Then too, all the legislative talk and the swaying in regard to
regulatory issues as well as lender willingness to lend really has
placed us in a position where simply lowering the fed funds rate may
But if we get into an
not be effective in some circumstances.
environment in which the rate of inflation does seem to come down-and, Mike Prell, even though you don't see it at this point I guess I
do see very sharply lower commodity or PPI numbers coming in the
future--it seems to me that looking at it in that context we ought to
be somewhat open to making certain that we do not let real rates
increase in this environment.
So, I'm in a position of somewhat more
openness for some possible action in the period ahead.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. Let me just
First of all, I don't think we have
make a couple of comments.

8/5/91

anything at all to add in terms of what Don Kohn said about the
diagnostics of money supply. But I do think the point that Bob Parry,

Ed Boehne, and Bob Forrestal made in terms of the real economy is
relevant. We had a directors' discussion last Thursday in which
there, too, the comments bearing on the recovery reflected extremely

sour attitudes on the part of some, if not most, of our directors,
although I don't think that is likely to provide a full explanation.
I just wanted to make a suggestion, which may not be very workable,
but let me try it anyway. The suggestion is this: Would it be
possible for Don, working with a handful of people around the Reserve
Banks, to try to design a quick and dirty little survey that would be
directed mainly at a sample of mid-size and large banks and would be
targeted at the chief financial officer of a cross section of banks
The survey would press
around the country over the next few days?
pretty hard in terms of questions like: What is motivating their
pricing strategy on deposits? What do they have to say about loan
demand? What do they have to say about credit standards? In other
words, in what would still be anecdotal rather than perhaps a
statistically perfect [way staff would] try to mount a special effort,
literally over the next few days, to get some additional insights of
what is going on there. I don't know whether anybody has anything
that they--

MR. KOHN. President Corrigan, we do have outstanding right
now [authority for] one of those quarterly loan [officer] surveys that
we had timed so that we would have the information for the [next] FOMC
meeting. The survey will be asking about credit standards and loan
demand and that sort of thing. What it is not asking about is the
deposits side. So, I think I could take your suggestion and twist it
a little to say that maybe we ought to give some serious thought to
going to some of the same banks and some different banks and ask them
whether they're doing something special on the deposit side, with
[We could ask] what is
their [retail] time deposits in particular.
happening there, whether they have any insights into the behavior, and
what they're doing in terms of their marketing and pricing. That
might be helpful. We could put it together with the loan survey
information.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One of the things that I'm not
certain about--maybe you know the answer--is whether we really are
sure that that regular survey is being responded to by senior enough
people in the organization that we're getting enough of the strategic
view of what is going on as opposed to a [unintelligible] view.
MR. KOHN Well, we can double check that. It has been
reasonably consistent with the anecdotal evidence that we've gotten
over time. Let me look into that a little further in terms of who is
filling it out and whom they check with and that sort of thing.
That's a good point.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it's a complicated issue and
it's hard to do much on short notice, but I have a suspicion, [given]
the way these things seem to be unfolding, that it's worth whatever
special efforts it may take to get further insights here.
MR. KOHN.

Okay.

MR. HOSKINS.

Mr. Chairman?

Lee Hoskins.

8/5/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Lee.

I think concern over the real economy is
MR. HOSKINS.
somewhat misplaced in the sense that our policy driver in terms of the
monetary growth has been relatively slow and we'd expect a relatively
modest recovery.
I can't forecast next quarter's growth or even this
quarter's very well.
The real concern that I have is that we [not]
allow money growth now to slip very close to the bottom of the range
or perhaps outside of it.
Coming off a four-year trend [of M2 growth]
of around 4-1/4 percent, I would regard it as somewhat of a monetary
shock if it came in at 2-1/2 percent or less.
I think we ought to be
concerned about where the economy is going to bulge in the future, and
related to that we ought to be continuing to produce a monetary growth
rate in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range if we want to get an adequate
response in the real economy and maintain our control over inflation.
So, I would lean strongly toward looking for a way to get monetary
growth moving again and that obviously would require us to give a
little operating room to the federal funds [unintelligible].
We don't
have to do it today; but certainly if these numbers look like this
going into the meeting, I would recommend that we consider lowering
the funds rate at that time. My last point is simply that I think it
would not be politically acceptable to be outside the target range,
particularly in this environment.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Bob Black. I would be very near
where Lee is if it were not that I think Don's explanation of these
portfolio shifts has a lot to do with the kind of behavior we've had
in M2. For example, over the last six months, if you exclude small
time deposits, M2 has grown at a rate of 9.8 percent; in the last
Now, if it
three months it has grown at a rate of 7.2 percent.
continues as weak as it looks for July and August, then I think we're
I do
going to have to do something to try to get it moving again.
think one could raise a legitimate question as to whether lowering the
federal funds rate really would do that, because of the tendency to
force more funds from small time deposits into the mutual bond funds.
But, anyway, I will be very concerned if [the weakness] continues much
longer. I'm almost concerned at this point that it has gone too far.
As far as the real economy is concerned, I agree with the
others that [the recovery] is sort of lagging, although it never looks
very good near the bottom of a recession. But this one, it seems to
me, is showing a little more weakness than I can remember having seen
in similar upturns in the past.
MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn.
I don't have
But
anything to add to the analysis that Don Kohn has given us on M2.
I think conditions in the Midwest in general are a bit more favorable
than we see in some of the national numbers.
But I very much agree
Our [regional] economy, at least in tone,
with Ed Boehne's analysis.
quite closely parallels his. At our June board meeting the economists
were really quite positive; at the July board meeting there was a
decided shift in tone; it was much more modest, particularly as it
related to some of the middle market companies here in the Midwest.
Also of concern is the agricultural situation, which started out as
It has
being a marvelous growing season in March, April, and May.
turned around on us; we now have quite a serious problem on our hands,
given the very dry conditions we had in June and in July as well.
That is really having a negative impact on the farm industry.

8/5/91

Having said all that, we expected the recovery to be much
more modest than other previous recoveries, and we seem to be getting
that.
But I do think at this point that the risks are on the down
side.
We ought to be following developments very carefully and it may
be appropriate to make another move.
Si, are there states other than Iowa that are
MR. ANGELL.
Does that go farther east and north in
being hit [by dry conditions]?
your District?
Indiana is very
No, in fact, Iowa is not as bad.
MR. KEEHN.
serious and Illinois is serious, though not quite as bad as Indiana.
I don't know, frankly; it's a bit mixed; some parts are dry and other
For June and
But to give you a number:
parts had pretty good rain.
July we had less rainfall in those two months than in any year since
1936.
So, it's quite a low level.
I'm thinking
Mr. Chairman, this is Mike Kelley.
MR. KELLEY.
First
down two tracks that are very closely interrelated, of course.
of all, if we tried to make a move that would force the Ms to get
going again, it seems to me that in the light of all that Don has
found so far we might have to make a very large move indeed in order
to accomplish that directly and overtly--one that might make us all
If we're going to
pretty nervous about its long-term consequences.
get the Ms moving, I think it has to happen in reverse at this point;
it's going to have to come up through the real economy, maybe largely
I have been heretofore
through the inventory cycle and other things.
fairly comfortable with waiting to see how the real economy came along
but I have to say that, in light of the reports from the presidents on
this call this morning, I have a lot more concern about that than I
did before.
I like your
This is Gary Stern in Minneapolis.
MR. STERN.
suggestion--I guess Don was heading down this path anyway--to try to
put some extra effort into understanding what is going on with M2
between now and the meeting because, as some of the members said very
With regard
early on, I don't think we can dismiss that altogether.
to the real economy, I am not as gloomy as many of my colleagues
mainly because it seems to me we were expecting a moderate recovery
and, as I interpret the statistics that we've seen, that's pretty much
what is underway.
Out here I don't detect any new signs of
I think the economy is doing reasonably
apprehension or nervousness.
well, all things considered, and people seem to be fairly comfortable
But I sense that
with the situation--not that it couldn't be better.
people are reasonably comfortable with the path we are on.
If I may, I will
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey.
They fairly well characterize what we
follow up on Gary's comments.
find here, with the exception of some drought conditions in eastern
Kansas through Missouri that I think is a part of what Si Keehn has
Otherwise, we don't see any lack of optimism here.
already detailed.
The District continues to go along not at a rapid clip, but
With respect to the money
nonetheless in a positive growth pattern.
numbers, I think it's obvious to everybody--at least it is to me--that
But we've
up until the month of July we were fairly well on track.
had one month's experience and a projection that nobody knows how
[accurate] it may or may not be.
I would just like to ask Don if the
staff has done any work on lending by other than banks in the sense

8/5/91

-10-

that banks have become less important in the credit extension process.
Is there something going on beyond the numbers that we look at and
that, given the monthly measures, could change the view a bit?
MR. KOHN. Well, there isn't a whole heck of a lot.
Commercial paper did pick up a bit in July, but commercial paper and
bank loans combined were still pretty weak. As I noted, long-term
debt market issuance was off and as I think someone mentioned: Who
knows what is going to happen with private placements in life
insurance companies? On business loans at finance companies, we don't
have anything for June or July there, so it's not clear whether
something new is going on. They have been on a slower growth track
this year than they were in the previous couple of years. We've
looked for other pieces of M2-type assets that might not be there.
One thing we looked at, for example, were these quasi-mutual funds
offered by IBM and GM and AT&T. And although AT&T started its fund
within the last few months, it has very little money in it and those
funds don't look as if they're absorbing a lot of M2. So, I don't
think I can identify some source of credit or of assets other than the
ones we've talked about that is filling the gap more than we think.
MR. MULLINS. This is David Mullins. We've now had a pretty
extended period of slow growth in M2. About a month ago I was still
pretty comfortable with the story. It is true that M2 tends to jump
around a bit; indeed, February and March are the only months we've had
in the past 9 or 10 in which M2 growth has been above the midpoint [of
our target range] and it was above the upper [limit in both months].
But as of the last time we met it had averaged out to 3.7 percent,
which was below the midpoint. I was pretty happy then with the story
that the liquid components were growing so in some sense there was the
raw material of monetary growth there. The less liquid components
were not growing because loan demand was weak, and time deposits and
M3 wholesale liabilities are issued to support loan growth and that
would come later. Also, the yield curve had steepened in the spring
and one would expect some shift out along the yield curve for a while.
After that ran its course and after the recovery took off, we should
see M2 growth fill out. What concerns me most is the rapid
deceleration over the past month or so, and it doesn't seem to me that
we have a good story on this. Loan demand is still weak but it's not
a lot weaker than it was over the past couple of months to explain the
deceleration. The yield curve hasn't changed much. It certainly
hasn't steepened much over the last few months, although it is true
that, if we put deposit rates--maybe M2's own rate--at the short end
of the yield curve, with the lagged fall in deposit rates there may
have been some steepening. And it's clear that there has been some
acceleration in the move out of M2 to bond funds, although it's
difficult to suggest that that could explain it all. So, I am
concerned with allowing M2 [unintelligible]; I was more comfortable
with it being 1 percent below the midpoint and expecting the recovery.
But it's more troubling [now].
On the real economy, when we have a recovery which is not
fueled by final demand but rather by this inventory process, I don't
know how much growth we can expect. We are four months into the
recovery though, if we assume that April was the trough, so we should
I would be concerned about ignoring
be seeing some [money growth].
the intermediate targeting of money and moving to targeting the real
economy and waiting until it showed definitive signs. We know with

-11-

8/5/91

the lags involved that if we go back to trying to respond only to the
real economy we run a great risk of being late and chasing the tail of
the economy and creating instability. When you look around, [none of
the aggregates] is growing:
not money, not credit, not debt, not L.
On the availability of credit side, I think we will find the insurance
company credit extension to be particularly weak. Finance companies,
because their holdings of business loans grew so rapidly last year,
seem likely to me to have run out of steam as has the bond and stock
issuance volume that we saw earlier on.
Much of this deceleration has
coincided with a flare-up again of concerns within the financial
system. It seems to me that it started a month or so ago with some of
the West Coast banks' concerns about the performance of the money
center banks and even some recent concerns [raised by] some comments
of chairmen on the Hill and the like about [financial] institutions.
I wonder what effect the growing concern about insurance companies is
having not only on credit extension but on consumer confidence.
It
seems to me that, as happened last fall, the financial system itself
becomes a bit more sluggish as a transmitter of monetary impetus; and
the relationship between interest rates and growth in money and credit
may have changed. The other thing I would note is that we made easing
moves in every month from October through April and that put a pretty
steady stream of stimulus in the pipeline, which is pretty well
exhausted by now. So, I think it's worth assessing.
It really runs
to the conceptual integrity of what we're doing here:
whether we're
trying to keep a stable environment of money and credit growth or
trying to do something else.
It is true that if the long end moved
down again, as Bob Black mentioned, that might steepen the yield
curve. Although it seems to me that the recent response of rates at
the long end to a number of events has suggested that the long end
might be well behaved and we might not see such a steepening.
MR. ANGELL. Well, in fact, I think if we're going to get the
recovery to behave the way it needs to behave, it's essential that
whatever moves we make are constructive in the sense of being
associated with declining long rates.
And now that we have the rates
down from the 8.48-8.50 percent level, I think our patience has
contributed to that.
If it is then seen that what we are targeting is
really price level stability and we think we are somewhat farther
along in that, then it seems to me that with patience we have some
chance of getting long bond rates down below 8 percent, which would
undoubtedly prove to be very beneficial in the housing industry and
provide a very desirable and steady underlying strength for a
recovery, which puts more units of goods out there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further comments by anybody?

MR. ANGELL. Well, it does seem to me, Mr. Chairman, that
sometimes we might want the moves we make to be somewhat subtle but at
some stage in the game it seems to me we might want to make a move
that has more of an announcement effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That sounds like a euphemism for the
discount rate! If there are no further comments, let's bring this
meeting to a close and we will convene again on August 20th at the
FOMC meeting here. Good morning, gentlemen.
END OF SESSION

