Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
January 9, 1991

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Chairman
Greenspan,
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
LaWare
Mullins
Parry
Seger

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Meizer, and Syron,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne and Stern, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, Simpson, and
Stockton, Associate Economists
Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr.

Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Slifman, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Oltman, First Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Mr. Rosenblum, Senior Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Dallas

Transcript of Conference Call of
January 9, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. This is an
update on actions that the Desk took yesterday. On the basis of a
very significant downward revision in the money supply since the last
Federal Open Market Committee meeting, it was decided that action was
required yesterday under the asymmetric directive, and the borrowing
requirement [was moved] down to the equivalent of 25 basis points on
I would
I now read the directive as being symmetric.
the funds rate.
like to call on David Lindsey to update everyone on the rather
disappointing data that have been coming in over the last couple of
weeks.
David.
MR. LINDSEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The broader monetary
aggregates were somewhat weaker in the latter part of December than
allowed for in the FOMC's path and, based on partial data, were
I should stress
decidedly weak in the first seven days of January.
both the partial nature of those data and the difficulties of sorting
out seasonal patterns in the weeks surrounding year-end. Even so, the
information in hand suggests declines in M2 and M3 of $8 billion and
$8-1/2 billion, respectively, in the week of January 7. Indeed, these
preliminary data for the January 7th week would put M2 at a level $2
billion below its fourth-quarter 1990 average level, which serves as
the base for the 1991 growth range, and some $14 billion below the
path implied by the FOMC's shorter-term expectation of a 4 percent
growth rate for November to March. We now place M2 growth in December
at a 1-1/2 percent rate and project a similar growth rate for January.
That compares with the expectations just after the FOMC meeting of
2-1/2 and 4-1/4 percent for those two months. A little of the
unexpected weakness in M2 is in the M1 component and in the overnight
RP and Eurodollar components that we have in hand. But the bulk of
the weakness is in nontransaction retail deposits and particularly in
MMDAs and small time deposits. This weakness is especially surprising
in the case of small time deposits in light of the further declines in
I think there is some question
market rates to below deposit rates.
about whether depositors are becoming further concerned about the
safety of banking institutions. For M3 the preliminary estimate for
the week of January 7 is $12 billion below both its fourth-quarter
average level and the level consistent with the FOMC's 1 percent path
from November to March. M3 was virtually flat in December and seems
likely to decline at about a 1/2 percent pace in January compared with
a positive 3/4 percent average pace implied by the FOMC's path. There
was some strengthening in institution only money funds in December
but, even so, the non-M2 component declined at a 6 percent rate.
Large time deposits and term RPs at banks continued to run off in
association with further moderate expansion in both retail deposits at
banks and in bank credit in December. We are now estimating bank
credit growth for that month at just below 3 percent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.
cash component?
MR. LINDSEY.

Any questions for David?

Dave, Ed Boehne here.

Do you mean currency?

What's happening to the

1/9/91

MR. BOEHNE.

Currency, yes.

MR. LINDSEY. We are projecting a considerable pickup for
January--on the order of a 13-3/4 percent rate of growth--based on a
strong performance early in the month.
That follows growth at a 6
percent rate in December, which itself was nearly double the November
pace.
MR. BOEHNE.
Can you see any differences in trends among
Districts or are these trends [widespread]?
MR. LINDSEY. The recent weakness in demand deposits and also
in the retail components for the week of the 7th was quite widespread
by District.
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. LINDSEY.

What about the currency pickup?
I really don't have very recent information on

that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that they were--

There is a problem in the numbers in

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. This is Jerry Corrigan. Let me just
say something on currency. In December, and especially in the last
few weeks of the current period, there has been a very large amount of
currency being shipped to the Middle East. Based on what we know here
and based on what we know about a couple of the major banks that are
engaged in this, I wouldn't be at all surprised if virtually all of
the net increase in currency that we're seeing in this period is going
to the Gulf states.
MR. SYRON. This is Dick Syron. David, could I add something
just as an observation on Ed Boehne's question about what is happening
in terms of the Districts?
I know this is happening somewhat
nationwide but we have the comparative data by District and, as you
might expect, we have seen a very, very substantial increase in
noncompetitive tenders [for Treasury] securities here. We have been
following this, obviously, on an issue-to-issue basis and it is really
quite [wild] on a year-over-year basis.
I think it is consistent with
your hypothesis that to some moderate extent increased concern about
holding funds at various institutions may account for some of this, at
least in some parts of the country.
MR. LINDSEY. Yes, we did see a turnaround--a $70 million net
change--in noncompetitive tenders at the Treasury bill auctions this
Monday.
I think that's consistent with that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for David?

MR. MELZER. Dave, how about reserves?
Have you been able to
restate the path data?
Do you have any sense of how reserves are
growing?
MR. LINDSEY. Well, of course, there have been complications
both because of the year-end and the reduction in reserve
requirements.
Peter Sternlight may wish to comment on the
implications of that for the federal funds market.
As you know, our

1/9/91

interpretation of reserve movements, given the funds rate objective,
is that reserves tend to be demand determined and, therefore, even
before the reduction in nontransactions reserve requirements,
I could give you
primarily follow movements in transactions deposits.
some estimates that we have. For December we are showing an increase
Now, that is break-adjusted,
in total reserves of $19 [percent].
That is followed
abstracting from the change in reserve requirements.
by a comparable change projected for January, though that is last
week's projection and it may be somewhat lower with the new money
numbers.
MR. MELZER.

Could you just tell me again what the bottom

line is?
MR. LINDSEY. The growth rate in both December and January
for total reserves is around a 19 to 20 percent pace.
I think you have to
MR. STERNLIGHT. If I could interject:
consider that those standard reserve growth measures are very
distorted by what has been happening over the year-end. The standard
series that the staff works up on that makes an adjustment for the
lower reserve requirement but it doesn't, as I understand it, make any
adjustment--we wouldn't know what adjustment to make--for desires to
That, of course, has been tremendously
hold excess reserves.
distorted as we have dealt with the year-end problem and the desires
of banks to behave very cautiously over this period.
Peter, could you take a minute to
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
outline the forces that are creating the extraordinary volatility in
the funds rate in recent days?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, Mr. Chairman, it has been a little
like trying to ride a roller coaster without a track ever since the
period just before year-end. We haven't known what allowance to make
for excess reserves, given the complications of the year-end and the
[We have been] making
phase-in of the reserve requirement reduction.
Somewhat by default we
allowances but they're very rough estimates.
might place more guidance on, of all things, the federal funds rate;
but that rate has been exceptionally volatile--soaring and plunging as
combinations of year-end pressures and the inflexibilities of unusable
excesses did their work. When we were facing these heavy year-end
pressures, rates were quoted way up there around the turn of the year,
particularly rates being paid by foreign, and especially Japanese,
I did get some very large repurchase agreement
institutions.
operations. We did finally subdue the pressures for financing over
the year-end date but in the process we built up a mountain of excess
reserves that had [produced] at that time, although not all that
consistently, abjectly easy money market conditions.
Through virtually all of this the market has clung to its
belief that we were aiming at, or that somewhere lurking in the
background was, a normal 7 percent funds rate that they saw us as
having pretty clearly moved to just after the December FOMC meeting.
But that perception changed yesterday, as you've already mentioned.
Funds were trading early yesterday at 7 to 8 percent and there was a
widespread view in the market that we had overprovided reserves
earlier in this maintenance period, which included the year-end.
So,
there was a general expectation that we would come in and drain

1/9/91

reserves, consistent with something like our 7 percent central
expectation for the funds rate. We didn't go in and drain because we
were on the verge of this policy shift that you outlined. We also had
a bit of concern that we were looking at a deep reserve shortage for
the day and that funds would tighten up just because of the reserves
of the day and what we were looking at for the period. But we were
well aware that by staying out we would [foster the] expectation in
the market that there had been a policy move, and that is what seems
to have taken place. They aren't 100 percent convinced but they're
pretty close to 100 percent convinced that there was a policy change,
probably to a 6-3/4 percent funds rate. Some of this volatility
should shake itself out once we get past this year-end period, but we
may end up with somewhat more volatility than we are accustomed to in
the funds rate just because the reduction in reserve requirements has
reduced the level of reserve balances that banks need to keep at the
Fed to meet their reserve requirements. And they have to be more
careful just on a day-to-day basis to avoid overdrafts on their
reserve accounts. So, that diminishes their flexibility for averaging
out ups and downs over the reserve maintenance period.
MR. BOEHNE. As I read yesterday's wire, there really was no
hint that we were on the verge of a change in policy. As a matter of
fact, the wording was such that it said you were concerned that the
market might think later in the day that we had changed policy when in
fact we hadn't, and you made a judgment as to whether it made more
sense to go in or not to go in. The next time I heard anything about
a change in policy was in The Wall Street Journal and The New York
Times this morning. Clearly, something happened between the call
yesterday--or at least when the wire went out--and press time of The
Wall Street Journal and The New York Times. I'm wondering if we're
in one of those situations where we changed policy because of market
confusion or if this was a policy change that was well designed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The timing resulted from the fact that
at very close to the time for a decision to act in the market we got
our preliminary money supply data for the week. Following a
significant downward revision of the previous week, they were revised
down further in the current week. Regrettably, the choice that we had
to make at that particular point was to do matched sales, indicating
no change in policy, and then subsequently respond to the money supply
figures, or to do what we did yesterday. I don't think we had very
much choice. I think the alternatives that we had were really limited
and locked in by time. However, I'm surprised that the notification
of the change was not communicated. Why was that?
MR. LINDSEY. We didn't communicate a final decision to alter
the path because my impression from talking to Don was that it was
still somewhat tentative as of Fed time yesterday. So, we didn't
communicate a final decision to change policy until this morning on
the conference call.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes. That, in effect, led to an
acceleration of the evaluation of the M2 data--bringing them up
several hours [before] we usually would get harder information. And
that harder information confirmed the earlier data that existed. But
I was not aware that that had not been communicated. I think in the
future that--

1/9/91

MR. LINDSEY. Peter can speak to this, but my impression was
that we did communicate to Peter before Fed time a very strong
predilection for a final decision to be made to ease but not a final
decision itself.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, I think that is correct.

MR. STERNLIGHT. That was certainly my understanding, and I
put in the program [wording that we had] every expectation that our
absence from the market could very well be interpreted as a move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It's really rather unambiguous from what
I could see of the [news clips].
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, I think some of the papers talked
about the market having a measure of uncertainty. I'd say they're 90
percent convinced; they're not absolutely convinced.
MR. ANGELL.
had no choice.

Mr. Chairman, I think your words were that we

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The choice, basically, was [to act or]
not to act and then act subsequently. Now, the point at issue was
whether one believed those data or not. And if we are going into a
period when we probably are going to get into some military hostility,
then I think we obviously will have to withdraw from the scene. My
judgment is that whatever action we have to take we have to do right
now and freeze. And, frankly, I found those money supply figures
quite disturbing.
MR. ANGELL. I'm presuming that we are talking ex post about
a decision that has been made.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Oh, the decision has been made, yes.

MR. ANGELL. This discussion is really reflecting on a
decision that already has been made. And it seems to me that there
ought to be no thought whatsoever of not supporting that decision. I
did want to suggest, however, that I feel you had a choice in that the
directive does not list money growth as the first item. If the
directive had had money growth as the first item, then I think you
would hardly have had any choice. But with price stability as the
first item in the directive, I guess I feel you did have a choice.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, if you're concerned about any of
the elements involved in the process, it is a process by which one has
to make a judgment as to what is crucial and what is not. And I
inferred from the discussions that we have had within the FOMC that
there is concern about the money supply, and I think rightfully so.
To the extent that these data [are accurate], you'll see very shortly
when they come out in chart form that [the weakness] is clearly a
problem that we're going to have to confront. And I'm not at all
convinced that we're not going to have this issue as a major concern
as we move through the early months of this year.
MR. ANGELL. I wasn't speaking so much in terms of the pros
and cons of the policy that's there; it just seems to me that you, the
Chairman, had the prerogative, given the directive. And I think we

1/9/91

understand what it was that you were wishing to accomplish by that
move.
I do believe that the uncertainties in the Middle East already
have made reading what we do somewhat more difficult than it otherwise
would be.
That is, looking at the price of gold or the foreign
exchange value of the dollar or the bond yield right now is much more
difficult in this environment. As to what took place yesterday, [we
have no way] of knowing what we were seeing from our moves versus what
the effects were of all the concentration on war or no war.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that's going to get increasingly
unstable over the next number of days depending, of course, on what
comes out of this meeting.
Yes, but I don't have the feeling that monetary
MR. ANGELL.
policy is so tenuous.
There really are quite a few days left in the
year for us to make monetary policy moves.
No matter what the money
growth is showing on a week-to-week basis, I think we can afford to
take a somewhat longer view. So, I don't feel quite as alarmed about
what I would expect to be a rather short war period, although I don't
know when it will start.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I certainly [hope] that your view
prevails because if it doesn't, I think we will have some real
difficulties.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Black. I was on the
call yesterday and I did not know at the time of the call that Peter
had had conversations with you and that Don had talked with you. But
when they told me they were not going to drain reserves, I told them I
thought that was an appropriate policy in view of the extreme
shortfalls in the money supply. Peter subsequently phoned me
following the call and told me about the conversations, indicating
I think you did
that he did not have time to tell me ahead of time.
exactly the right thing and I applaud your gracious act in moving when
you did.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
questions or comments?

Thank you.

Are there any further

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, Alan, let me just add a
comment.
In one sense, Governor Angell is right when he says the year
is long.
[Unintelligible] but I have to say that I am getting
increasingly concerned--not, as I said before, because I'm a
monetarist but because there is a pattern of things that seems to me
That
to be [systemic] and that could be very troublesome indeed.
includes the point that Dick made about individuals and institutions
shying away from faith in the banking system in a context in which the
money creation part of the banking system was already under some
pressure due to the credit crunch phenomenon that we discussed
So, apart from the timing of any particular policy move, I
earlier.
think this is a situation that we are going to have to look at very,
very carefully because it may be telling us something far more
fundamental than just the fact of anemic money supply growth rates.
But I think that's not something that can be dismissed lightly even
though subsequent events may begin to reverse some of the pattern
I think it's at least possible--I didn't say
we're seeing right now.
probable, but at least possible--that we are seeing something quite
extraordinary here in terms of what is going on in the real world.

1/9/91

MR. ANGELL. Jerry, given what we've seen with regard to the
banking industry, with certain banking supervisors appearing on every
talk show highlighting the industry's problems and the Congress almost
in a panic over not wanting the banking industry to be like the thrift
industry, it would seem somewhat likely that in such an environment
households and corporations would choose to hold their liquidity
balances at different institutions. And I would presume that the
commercial banking industry would begin suffering in regard to their
proportion of liquidity balances just as the thrift industry has.
Consequently, what I always like to rely upon in regard to measures of
liquidity [is] M2 and I have to say that the information value for me
has disappeared. I'm in no position to [argue with] those who
I have no way of
consider this to be a sign of economic weakness.
knowing that that's not precisely correct; but I don't have any way of
knowing that it is correct.
MR. MELZER. Along that line, given the concerns Wayne just
expressed about the informational value of M2 and M3, it seems to me
that we may want to consider in February whether or not we might want
to look at a broader array of reserve and monetary aggregates.
We
could conceivably get way out of position by acting on the wrong data.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I share that concern, Tom.
It's
hard to know what the heck these things are telling us right now.
MR. MELZER. But we may want to look
range so we don't get locked into a course of
retrospect we may not be happy with.
I'm not
do that at this point; I'm just saying that's
in February.

explicitly at a broader
action that in
saying that we have to
something to think about

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think we have to raise the obvious
questions:
What are the money supply data telling us and to what
At this
extent is that flowing through into economic decision-making?
particular stage, while we see considerable evidence that there is
some pulling back from holding commercial bank claims, it is by no
means clear what that is in fact saying, for example, about the
household balance sheet and the propensity to spend. And I think the
broader issue of the transmission of monetary forces through the
economy is something that is different in the current context than at
any time I recall.
I think something quite extraordinary is going on
and I think we're going to grapple for a while to understand it.
It's
not clear that we're going to learn very much over the next several
months either.
So, I think we're going to have some very difficult
analytical problems in constructing monetary policy.
MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I'm of the opinion that this
situation tends to compound itself in the sense that concerns about
the banking system and the general economy and also the overhang of
the Middle East situation have consumers so scared that they are not
going to spend. Businesses are holding back on moving forward with
any kind of investment. And the banks, in the face of apparent
movements in deposits and liabilities and so forth, compounded by
concerns about capital levels and examination results, are not going
to lend no matter how much [money] we put out there for them to use.
That's the sense of frustration and uniqueness about this situation
that I get.

1/9/91

MR. CORRIGAN. That's one of the reasons why [understanding]
the behavior of excess reserves--if we can figure it out--would be
very important.
If we have unambiguous evidence of a [marked]
increase in excess reserves targeted for year-end, apart from the
reduction in reserve requirements, that to me would be prima facie
evidence [in support] of the hypothesis that you just stated. One of
the things that's so frustrating right now is that for the reasons
Peter and others described earlier, it's hard to make that judgment
one way or another right now. But, prospectively, it seems to me that
the behavior of excess reserves could be a very important variable
because, as I said, if we did have evidence of a large autonomous
increase is excess reserves, it would indeed be compatible with the
hypothesis that you just stated:
that banks just aren't going to lend
to anybody for anything.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further questions or comments?

I have been
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey.
listening to all of the comments and I do have some concern about the
aggregates, although it seems to me that it is pretty soft information
But beyond that, it seems to me that
to be taking a policy action on.
almost everything that was expressed this morning by the various
participants was based upon uncertainty. And I don't think we should
be making policy [based] on uncertainty. So, I hope that we hold
steady for a period of time in the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further comments or questions?

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Bob Black again. Just briefly, I
think this does raise the question of whether the discount rate ought
to be one of the things [the Board] may have to address just as a
I guess the
matter of alignment [with] the federal funds target.
discount rate really doesn't have much role, but it's still something
I think we have to look at even if we don't allow any of that change
I feel it's the proper
to show through in the federal funds rate.
course right now.
If not, thank you
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Further comments?
very much, everyone. We will look forward to seeing you at the next
meeting.
END OF SESSION

