Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
April 12,

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

1991

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman, and Simpson,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors

Transcript of Telephone Conference Call of
April 12, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone.
It has been
2-1/2 weeks since we had our last FOMC meeting and I had tentatively
planned to have a telephone conference sometime next week just for a
general review. But an event is occurring today that may push us into
an uncomfortable position and I think the guidance of the Committee
overall is going to be quite important as to how we behave. The CPI
that will be released this morning is going to be better than market
expectations.
That, obviously, will not be reported until 8:30 this
morning.
That is probably going to cement expectations, which are
pretty general at this stage, that we are in the process of moving [to
an easier policy].
And there is a sense that market participants
increasingly are saying that they are less and less concerned about
the consequences of our moving and more and more comfortable. Twentyfour hours ago, as Tom Melzer knows, I frankly would have preferred
not to do anything. But we are potentially in a position at this
stage where if we don't move, the markets could break. Having stiffed
them several times in the last week, it's the type of situation that
raises the degree of risk. But the point at issue here is:
Are we
willing to take that risk?
And more importantly:
What are the
broader aspects of the underlying economic structure?
On the positive side, clearly, are the initial claims data
that came out yesterday. While the BLS figures were extremely
exaggerated, even our adjusted data, which pick up Good Friday, show
an important turn. And even though the retail sales figures for March
were weak, the revision for the February data was clearly significant.
Yesterday, I thought the markets would view that as a significant turn
and when the markets rallied as they did I was of the impression that
what we were looking at was an economic cycle rally and not a Fed
expectations rally. When I got back here in the evening and looked at
all the reports, it was clearly the other way around. What I'd like
to do is briefly review my impressions of what has been happening over
the last several weeks--and there have been a number of changes--and
then go around the table, so to speak, to get the impressions of the
rest of the Committee.
On the positive side, the fact that unit labor costs clearly
have been subdued is now being verified by prices. M2 has slowed its
rate of increase again, although we may be running into seasonal
problems.
The exchange rate obviously has moved up.
On the side of
the economy overall, I think we have a divergence:
We still get some
anecdotal evidence that residential real estate is moving up but
industrial orders, as best I can judge, are continuing to sag and are
getting increasingly gloomy, if one can put it in those terms.
It's
important at this stage to make judgments, if we were to move, about
what the costs of moving are.
It's obvious that if we were to move
and we didn't need to move--in other words if the economy clearly
started to pick up significantly--we would have to be prepared to
reverse and reverse fairly early in the recovery.
If we're prepared
to do that, frankly I don't see very much in the way of downside
market risk in moving. But it really rests upon how people view the
markets, the changes in confidence, and whether or not the economy is
in a process of stalling. My increasing impression of recent days is
that we are making very little progress in the industrial area, in the
capital goods area. And I do get the impression, having spoken to a

4/12/91

number of industrialists in the last number of days, that they are
getting increasingly nervous. Whether or not that is a change of
significance is not clear, but what is very clear is that nothing very
much is happening.
So, what I'd like to do is to start off by going around the
table and getting the first input on recommendations of how we think
we ought to respond to these statistics this morning. Our choice, as
best as I can see at this stage, is to do nothing or concurrently to
move the discount rate down by 50 basis points with probably a 25
basis point federal funds rate passthrough. I'd be curious to get
people's views. Vice Chairman, could you add to anything I said?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. LAWARE.
from the West Coast.
MR. BOEHNE.

I don't know about other Banks--

I'm getting a lot of static trying to hear you
The same on the East Coast.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, let me try to be heard as best
I can. I, for one, would favor a 1/2 point discount rate cut and a
1/4 point funds rate reduction. I feel that way for three reasons.
First of all, I just don't see much at all in terms of the economy
presently, especially in the industrial sector. If anything, I get
the feeling from people that attitudes in the industrial sector
actually have slipped. The second reason--and this is something I
mentioned at the last Committee meeting but it was very strongly
confirmed this weekend at the BIS meeting--is that activity in the
industrial world is clearly slipping across the board. And that has
quite important implications for net exports. Going around the table
at the BIS on Monday, for example, 6 of the 11 countries, including
Switzerland, reported that as of right now their GNP was declining.
And all of the other five, including Japan and Germany, reported what
I consider to be significant slowing relative to what they had to say
four or five months ago. The third factor that is lodged in my mind
is this market expectations issue. Peter Sternlight tells me that,
given the CPI, there will be a virtual crescendo of opinion that we
will be [easing] and that if we don't move, people will say that the
reason we haven't moved is because of all these press reports of
dissents. So, in all those circumstances and given the much better
price numbers, I do very much favor a 1/2 point reduction in the
discount rate and a 1/4 point reduction in the funds rate. As to the
Chairman's last point, I wouldn't be the slightest bit hesitant about
reversing, and reversing early, if that were necessary.
We
MR. SYRON. This is Dick Syron. If I could just report:
had our directors' meeting late yesterday with some other business to
consider. I was quite struck, I might say not just at the margin, by
a shift in people's feelings back to [the views they held] previously,
maybe a couple of meetings ago. People were beginning to see some
[signs of improvement] but I think there's a stall in that feeling.
We do have some capital goods producers and this view is very strongly
reflected there, particularly in the electronics area. Also, there is
a change in concerns obviously on the consumer side, and a real
softening in exports, including exports of defense goods, was
mentioned by a couple of people. So, I think that we do have a
[shift] here in that some of the immediate postwar euphoria that we

4/12/91

-3-

thought was going to provide a bit of a kick may be waning and we may
really be at a very tender point in terms of whether [the expansion]
catches on or not. So, I would favor moving in the direction that you
recommend; your point is very well taken, though, that all of us
should make a rather explicit commitment to each other that we have a
willingness to shift quickly as things do catch on. In my own view
that move would be most appropriate not by moving the discount rate
back up but by moving the funds rate up to maintain some spread
between the discount rate and the funds rate as we go ahead.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn in Chicago. I
agree completely with the proposal that you've made. My sense of it
is that attitudes were somewhat better after the ceasing of
hostilities but that some of that euphoria is now beginning to
dissipate. And certainly the underlying economic data coming out of
the industrial sector have not yet begun to show the improvement that
we would expect. Specifically, I might comment on the steel industry.
We had a meeting of our local economists yesterday and the
representatives of the steel industry reported significant and new
weakness in their industry. They are now operating at rates of about
70 percent and that's down quite considerably from levels a little
earlier in the year. Their expectation is that shipments in the first
quarter will come in about 9 percent lower than last year. So,
clearly, in that area there is continuing weakness. And I sense from
talking to other people that that's a fairly pervasive comment.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal. Based
on what I've been saying at the last couple of meetings, I'm sure it
won't be any surprise to you that I agree entirely with your
prescription for a drop in the discount rate and a contemporaneous 25
percentage point drop in the funds rate. Everything that I hear
confirms what has been said by others this morning. The industrial
sector in this part of the country continues to be quite weak. We're
not seeing any particular increase in consumer spending. In fact,
consumers seem to be worried about the future, about the employment
situation. As I mentioned at the last meeting, I, too, am quite
concerned about the performance of our trading partners abroad and the
effect on our export sector. So, I think the time is right and I see
really very little risk in moving at this time. With the inflation
numbers that have come out, we have this window of opportunity to
move. We have the foreign exchange situation on our side as well at
this particular time. So, I would hope that we would be able to move
promptly. Just going back to what Jerry said--and this perhaps is a
gratuitous comment that I shouldn't make--I would very strongly hope
that in this particular circumstance, given all the publicity, that we
would be able to move in a fairly united way.
MR. ANGELL. Wayne Angell [in Ottawa, Kansas].
I'm very
interested in what I'm hearing. I guess I'm going to express a [note]
of caution and a real preference not to move as the rest of you
[unintelligible.]
It seems to me that for the last six months we have
made considerable [easing] moves in anticipation of these numbers that
we're getting. What we're doing today is really in anticipation of
where the economy will be in the third and fourth quarters. And I'm
somewhat troubled by the notion that we respond both in anticipation

4/12/91

and then we also respond on an economic announcement, which I find-can you hear?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. ANGELL. Okay. I find it to be somewhat disconcerting
that we would in a sense let market expectations drive us on days of
announcements.
[Unintelligible] the stock market moves up. But I
don't see how we can afford to time our moves on [the discount rate]
or the fed funds rate based upon when the markets expect us to move.
The bond markets obviously haven't moved. Now, this does not mean
that I would not favor looking again in a couple of weeks to see what
the M2 numbers are. I know that April seasonal adjustments are very
suspect. But if we were to move based upon the fact that either a
three-month growth rate or six-month growth rate of the M2 is
[unintelligible] but I do not see exchange and commodity prices or
otherwise that would indicate a price [unintelligible].
Commodity
prices really are more horizontal than anything else; and it seems to
me that the wholesale consumer price moves that we're seeing for the
first [time] are the first indication of what we hope will be there in
later months. I just have some real reluctance to go ahead and
steepen the yield curve as much as this may do. But I may indeed be
in a minority.
MR. BLACK.
earlier this month?

Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Black. What did M2 do
Do we have an estimate for April?

MR. KOHN. Bob, we're estimating about 2-3/4 percent growth
in April. We've had some minus weeks in the first half of the month
and, as the Chairman noted, it's a very difficult month [to adjust]
seasonally. But it is coming in weaker than we had projected at the
FOMC meeting.
MR.BLACK. If it weren't for that, I'd be very much with
Governor Angell on this. We had a meeting of our directors yesterday
and the optimism of one director was off the charts.
for example, 78 out of 80 firms were reporting big
increases in sales; we heard very little in the way of negative
comments. However, I do think you're right, Mr. Chairman, in your
assessment of the industrial sector: That hasn't done much yet. But
unless there is real weakness in M2, I think we've done everything to
provide all that we need for a recovery. And unless this slowdown we
think we see in April is permanent, I think we will regret a move now.
MR. PARRY. This is Bob Parry in San Francisco. I don't
think that in the last couple of weeks I've detected much variation
from the general pattern that we have had in the West, which would
seem to suggest that things are just going along at a fairly modest
pace. I think it's a bit early to expect much of an effect in the
published statistics. When we talk to our directors we still get a
fairly mixed bag--I'd say somewhat [along the lines] of what Bob said.
MR. STERN.

We can't hear you in Minneapolis.

MR. PARRY.

Anyone else?

SEVERAL.

Yes, we can hear.

4/12/91

MR. PARRY. We had some indication of a pickup in the retail
area but not much pickup in the residential housing area.
[On
balance,] it's hard to say. My preference would be to stay where we
are, although I really wouldn't raise serious objections to this
move.
MR. BERNARD. Excuse me.
last sentence, please?

Bob Parry, could you repeat that

MR. PARRY. Yes.
I said that my preference probably would be
not to do anything and to wait and see how things develop. But I
would not raise serious objections to the proposal of the Chairman.
MR. BOEHNE. This is Ed Boehne. This is the time in the
business cycle when we always have the dilemma of overdoing ease
versus buying the necessary insurance to make certain that the
recovery takes hold. And one can never be sure which is the right
choice. My sense is that things are still turning around. There
clearly was a euphoria at the end of the war. My sense is that we're
still getting the kinds of signals that one would expect, even though
they're mixed, at the early stages of a recovery. So, I'm cautious
about making a major move at this point.
I think one of the reasons
that we have been successful in monetary policy--more so in recent
years than I think in recent decades--is that we have tried to
anticipate at moments like this.
Rather than making dramatic moves,
we have tended to make more modest and more frequent moves.
If we do
move, I would be more comfortable with just a 1/4 point drop in the
federal funds rate and no change in the discount rate.
I don't think
the technical reasons are so overwhelming that we can't run a penalty
discount rate for a while.
I think that kind of move could very well
have a favorable effect on the bond market in that it would show that
we want to buy a little more insurance but we're cautious about
further moves.
It would demonstrate that we're sensitive to the
current situation but we're also conscious of some of our past
mistakes of overdoing the easing at this point [in the cycle].
So, my
preference would be either to do nothing or, if you feel like doing
something, to limit it to a 1/4 point on the federal funds rate.
MR. SYRON. Ed, I'm sorry to butt in. This is Dick Syron.
Let me just ask you a question for clarification on that.
I share
your view that we're at a point where it's usually--but maybe more so
in this case--hard to know exactly what to do.
Still, the concern I
would have, and I would be interested in your reaction, is about
changing our procedures at this point, particularly given all the
brouhaha that has been going on about having to change.
I'd be a
little concerned about whether that gives off more confusing signals.
In other words, a penalty discount rate at this point-MR. BOEHNE. No, we've had penalty discount rates in the
past.
I don't happen to be in my office right now, but I looked it up
a few weeks ago and we have had situations in recessions, at the
turning points, where we've had this kind of situation. As far as all
of this most unfortunate publicity that we have gotten, I don't think
it has anything to do with what we think is right for the economy.
One issue here is that there are only three or four Reserve Banks that
are in for a discount rate drop.
And I would think that if we are
sensitive about that sort of thing and we have a discount rate cut
this morning when we only have three or four Reserve Banks in, we're

4/12/91

If we dropped
going to play more to that kind of unfortunate press.
the federal funds rate and we did it in the traditional way where the
Chairman simply uses his prerogative, it seems to me that that would
be more conducive to an easing that we could explain. But if we did
both, I'd be terribly concerned.
I guess I would be more concerned about these
MR. SYRON.
expectations because it seems to me on the substance, Ed, that the
first direction we'd go in would be the discount rate even if [the
funds rate] didn't mirror the first 25 points or so, which I happen to
favor doing.
I'll leave it at that.
MR. BLACK. This is Bob Black again. I think Ed Boehne has
made an excellent speech and I would join him on the discount rate.
I have some deep
MR. STERN. This is Gary Stern.
reservations about the action you're proposing at this point. As Ed
Boehne pointed out, the number of Banks is one issue. But beyond
that, my view of the economy is that the news we've received since the
last meeting is no worse and may be a bit better than I might have
expected. The attitudes out here are clearly better. Home sales in
the Twin Cities in March, for example, were the highest in any month
I'm not sure that the bond markets
going back to some point in 1988.
And beyond that, I think we have to be a little
[unintelligible].
careful about the price data [unintelligible] that it would be quite a
I'm not precluding
bit of working its way into other price measures.
at this point that it is going to turn out to be a durable phenomenon;
it may even-MR. MELZER. This is Tom Melzer. Alan, I heard the same
anecdotal information you heard out here yesterday and I would agree
Has there
The question I had in my mind is:
with your [assessment].
really been time for the rebound in housing to show through to the
There are other people on this call who would know
industrial sector?
the answer to that much better than I. I'd also say that I wouldn't
rule out the possibility somewhere along the line here for us to have
to ease further, although I wouldn't be inclined to do anything now.
Most of my reasons have been expressed. First of all, I'm not
inclined to react to one piece of weekly or monthly data; I think
Secondly, I think it could be a trap of letting
that's dangerous.
Finally, and most importantly in
market expectations lead us around.
my view anyway, the cumulative thrust of monetary policy over the last
I think that has
three or four months has been quite stimulative.
been very appropriate. But all the aggregates, whether you look at
reserves or money or whatever, have been slowing at pretty rapid
I don't
rates. And in general that [slowing] has been accelerating.
know how to interpret M2 and I'm a little reluctant to rely on our
projections of what an aggregate will do in the future. Anyway, for
those reasons, my preference would be to do nothing right now.
I had the
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, Roger Guffey.
opportunity over the last couple of days to have discussions with
directors from across the District as well as to meet with regional
It's fairly clear that, at least in this
businessmen and bankers.
District, there is a continued modest improvement in our economy and
It does seem to me that
very little sentiment for any further ease.
past monetary policy actions perhaps have not worked themselves
through. As a result, on balance, I would not prefer the action that

4/12/91

you have proposed. On the other hand, another 1/4 percentage point
doesn't bother me much, provided we are clearly committed to moving
the rate back up promptly when we find that the turning point has
indeed begun to surface.
I'm really concerned, I suppose as much as
anything else, about our acting because the market has expectations
that we should act. We should do what we think is appropriate. And
if we're going to move, I would prefer to wait until maybe sometime
toward the end of next week.
MR. LAWARE. This is John LaWare [in San Francisco].
I'm not
convinced in my own mind that the effects of all the things we've been
doing here for the last several months have been fully reflected in
the market in the first place.
In the second place, I find it almost
embarrassing to seem to be reacting to market expectations unless we
are truly convinced that the economy is on dead center and that there
is some effect that is going to take place with another 1/4 point move
in the funds rate--that it is going to suddenly stir the economy to
action.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

John, may I just interrupt a minute?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I forgot to mention--and I think you
mentioned it yourself at one point--that if we move down again, the
general consensus is that the prime rate will move.
MR. LAWARE. Yes, I noted you had mentioned that at one
point.
I don't know whether that is going to be what jogs things
loose. Certainly, the banks now have some margin opened up for them
and it would be logical for them to move by 1/4 point finally. But,
again, I'm not sure that that's going to be the magic thing that's
going to change the economy or bring it to life with more vigor. On
balance, I am still rather reluctant to make this kind of move.
On
the other hand, I think it's important that we seem to be in concert.
So, I'm willing to go along if the feeling is that this is the kind of
signal that we ought to be sending. But I'm skeptical about the
effects of the signal.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

I'd
MR. KELLEY. This is Mike Kelley in Portland, Oregon.
like to come in at this point because that exactly expresses my
sentiments, John.
I'm with you on that.
I ask myself if this
combination of factors that we've been running through here this
morning is not exactly what one would expect at about this sort of an
inflection point [in the cycle].
And I ask myself if it's not too
early to [decide] that the economy requires further stimulus. We have
one good bunch of inflation numbers and I wonder if that's enough of a
robin's flight to assure us that we have spring. I think we should
have had better inflation numbers before now and we haven't; and I
would very much like to have their better tone verified a little more
than by having just one set of them. As I listen to the presidents
about the real economy, it seems to be very mixed, not definitely
down.
Again, I suspect that that may be about what one would expect
in the way of a report at this point. We always feel that we need
more data; but to me this is one time when we really do need more
data.
I would prefer that we wait to see how things are verified in

4/12/91

one direction or another. However, I do agree with John that it's
important--and others have said this--that we show a level of
togetherness here if we possibly can do so.
So, I would not be
completely opposed to making a move at this time if that seems to be
the way that we should go.
MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, Lee Hoskins. We had a board
meeting yesterday and we had some talk about the fact that we don't
have much strength on the industrial side in our District, as you
pointed out. We don't have any appreciable weakness or deterioration
either. But beyond that, I have a very strong disagreement with
moving either rate at this point in time. We have put into place what
I consider to be a good monetary policy. And I don't believe that we
can alter that based on market expectations. We have trained the
markets to react to monthly numbers, whether it's employment numbers
or CPI numbers. And I think that's a bad precedent to continue to
set. What we ought to do is to let the policy that we've put into
place--which, as I said, is a good one--work its way out. If it
proves down the road that in fact things were weaker than we thought,
we could reassess at that point. But I really feel strongly that we
should not train the market to react because of numbers and then react
to their expectations [based] on those numbers. I just think that's a
wrong-headed policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
chance to comment.
MR. BERNARD.

Gary Stern, I don't know if you had a

Yes, he has.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer [hasn't].

Okay, I'm sorry.

Bob McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, we had a board meeting yesterday
and it was neither very positive nor negative. As you know, our
directors have been submitting a proposal for a reduction in the
discount rate for some time now, and I would feel uncomfortable
arguing against that in view of their position on it. But nothing was
said in our board meeting yesterday that indicates any further
weakness. As a matter of fact, things are better in our part of the
world than they are in the rest of the country.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Does anybody else have any other
comments? Can the Board Members stay on? We have another issue that
we have to discuss. So, gentlemen, what I hear at this particular
stage is a mixed view or willingness to do perhaps a 1/4 point and
possibly go further. In the Board meeting I think we ought to discuss
the other issue and see if we can all come to a general conclusion
before the day is out either to move or not to move. In any event,
can the Board members stay on?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

MR. KELLEY.

Yes, sir.

MR. LAWARE.

Yes, indeed.
END OF SESSION

