Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 2-3, 1991

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, July 2, 1991, at 2:30 p.m. and was
continued on Wednesday, July 3, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist
Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey,
Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Slifman, and
Ms. Tschinkel, Associate Economists
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Danker and Mr. Brady, Section Chiefs, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Oliner, Senior Economist, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Lovett, Messrs. Lang,
Rolnick, and Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Kansas City,
New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President,
Boston

Federal Reserve Bank of

Messrs. Guentner and Thornton, Assistant Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of New York and St. Louis

1.

Attended portion of meeting relating to the Committee's discussion
of the economic outlook and its longer-run objectives for monetary
and debt aggregates.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
July 2-3, 1991
July 2, 1991--Afternoon Session
MR. CROSS.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Sam?

Lee.

Sam, what is our outstanding foreign currency
MR. HOSKINS.
exposure now relative to the limit?
MR. CROSS.

We hold $20.9 billion against a limit of $25

MR. PARRY.

Sam, has the market become aware of that swap?

billion.

The market has not become aware of exactly what
MR. CROSS.
The market did notice, as I mentioned in my
has taken place.
comments, that the Bundesbank was selling Treasury securities, which
they needed to do in order to position themselves for this. And the
market has seen the Treasury's balance sheet, released yesterday,
But unless
which shows the change in certain of the accounts.
something has happened in the course of the day, they are still a
There are some who
little uncertain as to exactly what that means.
are interpreting these moves as positioning for large-scale
intervention either by the Federal Reserve or the Treasury or in the
sale of the Treasury securities by the Bundesbank. So, they've seen
some of the data and I think they will get a clearer view of this when
the Bundesbank announces its balance sheet figures, which are supposed
to come out Thursday but may come out on Friday.
MR. TRUMAN.

They told us this morning close of business

tomorrow.
It may be Wednesday or Friday. They're now
MR. CROSS.
talking close of business Wednesday. So, there will be a statement,
which will not mention the United States, but will talk about an
I imagine people will
exchange of these reserve assets for dollars.
be able to put two and two together at that point.
MR. PARRY. And you think an interpretation would be that
this is just something routine or--?
MR. CROSS.
Well, I think when they see everything that has
happened, they will begin to understand just what it was.
Up until
now they've been wondering whether it was a gathering war chest for
[intervention].
MR. TRUMAN. Our understanding is that when the Bundesbank
releases its statement at the close of business on Wednesday, they
will say that their gross assets and liabilities have been reduced
because of an exchange with a foreign monetary authority. When the
statement of the System comes out, given that hint, the market will
then presumably be able to put it together as to what monetary
authority is involved. We and the Treasury have worked out-MR. CROSS.

We've given the Treasury a statement.

7/2-3/91

MR. TRUMAN.
--a general statement just saying:
"Yes, the
U.S. and German authorities have agreed to reduce their holdings, have
been working on this for some time, and have come to a mutually agreed
off-market transaction."
MR. CROSS.
So, by Friday when the Federal Reserve balance
sheets come out, they will have all the information.
MR. TRUMAN. It's not intended to provide information on the
whole [agreement involving] 10 billion [DM] but essentially what has
at that point impacted on the balance sheet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
reserves consolidated?
MR. CROSS.

Sam, when do we release our monthly

That comes out--

MR. TRUMAN. Well, that would be much later. The System's
monthly statement is only published in the Federal Reserve Bulletin.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
release with the Bulletin.

No, I think it's released in the press

MR. TRUMAN. U.S. reserves are released about two weeks after
the end of each month. But that combines the valuation adjustments of
all kinds of other things, so it's not-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

These are big enough numbers.

MR. TRUMAN. Well, in mid-July that will show what is on the
balance sheets as of the end of June.
sheet]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. It will show the Treasury [balance
as well; that's the thing.
MR. CROSS.

It shows both.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It shows the Treasury, the ESF--

MR. TRUMAN. The United States foreign exchange reserves,
including Federal Reserve holdings, are shown valued at market.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Lee.

MR. HOSKINS.
Sam, it seems to me that there might be some
merit in having the Committee consider formally lowering the limit for
a couple of reasons. One, it's symmetric; it shows that we can put a
reference point back around this Committee discussion of when we want
to take a look at the portfolio. That is, we have to move them down
[given that] we move them up.
Second, we can face some discussions in
the market that we're simply reloading--that we did a swap and we're
reloading to go after protecting [our] currency again--and I think
Lastly, I think it's the right thing for us
that would dispel that.
to do both in terms of the currency holdings as well as the
warehousing arrangement; since the warehousing arrangement is $4-1/2
I don't
billion and the limit is $10 billion, it's not a real limit.
think that cuts down our flexibility. It seems to me that it
indicates to a lot of other players--Congress, other central banks,

7/2-3/91

and the markets--what our intentions are with respect to the currency.
And if there is a reason that the Committee has to move, then we can
take a look at the limit; and if we run up against it, then presumably
But it gives a point of
we'll have a good reason for moving it.
reference and framework for discussing where we want these activities
to take place and the magnitude and why we're doing them. But if we
leave the limits where they are, we're working in an asymmetric way.
We only bump the limit when we hit it and we never lower it.
MR. CROSS. Well, we do, of course, look at these limits
We can certainly examine it to see whether the present
every year.
limits are appropriate. The fact that it has come down from $24 to
$21 billion is certainly a decline, but we do have to leave room in
these limits because we are earning interest regularly on our holdings
and we always have to consider what kind of [leeway] we need in order
to allow for the interest accruals as well as for the possibility of
being able to operate in the market when it's appropriate to do so.
MR. TRUMAN. President Hoskins, I think there are two other
considerations. One is that the arrangement, while it reduces our
position by about $3.3 billion, pertains to a forward transaction, and
only the first chunk of that has been done. So, I think there's a
risk that until the full operation is completed you will confuse the
market by lowering the limit in anticipation of what is in the
Secondly, as far as the
contract but has not been put out.
warehousing is concerned, the Committee did consider that in February
and the amount that has been warehoused has not yet been changed since
then.
Sam and I both in our conversations with the Treasury have told
them that we think it's important, as this unfolds and they get the
actual dollars, to reduce the warehousing and to bring that down
substantially by the end of the year. So, the beginning of next year,
when we have completed this operation, would seem to me the reasonable
time to consider whether the Committee wants to change the limits.
If not, would

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Sam?
somebody like to move [approval]?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

I'll move it.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Shall we go on to
Joan Lovett is here, I gather; her
the Domestic Desk [report]?
colleague is off at some unannounced place doing unannounced things.
MS. LOVETT. Presumably having a nice time!
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you.

Questions for Ms. Lovett?

MR. KEEHN. Joan, what is likely to come out of a refunding
study, and will they [implement any change from] the third quarter
out?
I
MS. LOVETT. They are looking at an array of options.
believe their thinking at this point is not to try to change the whole

7/2-3/91

structure, because it's a process that has worked very well, but to
make some adjustments around the margin. It's possible that if they
do decide to make a change, they would probably want to make that
change known before we get into the August refunding and conceivably
even before the next round of two- and five-year note sales.
MR. PARRY. Even after taking into account the strength of
economic statistics in the month of May, were you surprised by the
amount of the increase in bond yields, especially since there were
some indications that financial markets were feeling a little better-or at least it seemed that way--about inflation?
MS. LOVETT. Yes, some people feel that the move up to 8-5/8
percent or toward that level--it didn't really stay there--was
reflecting an awful lot all at once. And, therefore, the yield has
come back to the 8-1/2 percent trading range and it is sort of being
held in that range because the views on both sides in terms of the
[likely] extent of this recovery seem to be somewhat offsetting.
There is a concern that even if the rate of inflation does come down,
as analysts say they think it will, there are going to be sufficient
pressures elsewhere in the long run that may keep that particular part
of the yield curve from moving down much more. In that connection
they keep looking at the yield environment in Germany and other
countries and feel that it just may be a factor inhibiting any
possible downward move in long rates even if inflation comes in
better, as they think it will.
MR. PARRY.

Are they expecting strong real demands for

credit?
MS. LOVETT. Well, there have been a lot of reports about
demands for credit abroad. I think right now, as far as people can
see, the major source of credit demand is in the U.S. government and
perhaps the state and local entities. What the corporate issuers are
doing isn't being seen as an important part of the demand for credit
but as restructuring their own balance sheets.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Joan?
If not, would
somebody like to move to ratify the actions of the Desk since the last
meeting?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'll move it.

Without objection.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, could I briefly bring
up another matter related to Desk activities?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

By all means.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The matter is a little project that
we've been thinking about up in New York and I've touched base with
Don Kohn on it very generally. I affectionately call it "save a
tree."
The concept is basically this:
I've asked the two Desks to
pull together a little report that is intended to remind all the
Committee members of all the routine reports that the two Desks put
out, ranging from daily to yearly. What we'd like to do is to send to
the Committee members a paper that outlines those reports and the

7/2-3/91

frequency with which they're prepared and to raise with Committee
members the question of whether they all are needed or at least
whether they all are needed with the same frequency that they are
currently being produced, recognizing if nothing else that screens
have changed the world.
I am simply mentioning this for the
Committee's benefit right now. What I would plan on doing is to make
this package available to Don and his people. Who knows?
They may
But after they have looked at it, then
want to add some things to it!
we'd circulate it to the Committee. It's designed so that you can get
through it probably in 20 minutes or a half hour at the most and
[provide] us some indication as to whether all these reports are still
needed at least with the frequency with which we now produce them. As
I said, it's called "save a tree," but it's also fair to say that if
we can whittle away at this a little, it would save a lot of time on
the part of the people who prepare these reports.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You're saying that if the results come
in in the other direction--that maybe if there were howls out there-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's right.
Obviously, if the
results come in in the other direction--that people really find the
We also in this
status quo valuable--we'll maintain the status quo.
paper have solicited your suggestions as to whether there are some
things we're not doing that we could do. But I do think, Mr.
Chairman, that it's worthwhile at least every now and then to take a
look at this and make sure that all the time and effort and money that
goes into preparing these things is producing the desired results.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Mike Prell and Ted Truman.

MR. PRELL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. We've distributed a
packet of charts with red lettering on it entitled "Staff Presentation
Statement--see Appendix.
to the Federal Open Market Committee."
MR. TRUMAN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Thank you, gentlemen.

Questions for

either?
MR. PARRY. Mike, the chart that you had on state and local
governments was a rather dramatic chart. We're beginning to see a lot
of efforts on the part of state and local governments to deal with
these'problems, and the dollars that we're talking about are not
insignificant. For example, California very recently passed a series
of laws that are going to have an impact of $15.7 billion; and New
York has a sizable one as well.
Typically, we don't spend much time
taking these kinds of influences into account, but are we missing
something here--especially when we have new developments like this?
Is there something that we should be doing to look a little more
deeply as to what the potential micro impacts might be?
MR. PRELL. Well, we've been attempting to monitor this. We
raised the flag long ago that there was an emerging sizable imbalance.
And we have built into our forecast, certainly since the beginning of
this year, a picture quite similar to what we have now of historically
quite weak state and local real purchases.
MR. PARRY.

There is a tax side as well.

7/2-3/91

MR. PRELL. That's right, and we've built that in too.
And
we've been noting for some time that a small but not totally
insignificant ingredient in our expectations for consumer prices would
be repeated increments to indirect business taxes.
That plays a role,
and, of course, even the property tax increases tend indirectly to
show up in the consumer price index through the rents and owner
equivalent rent figures.
So, we think those are built into our
disposable income projection. But this is a sector that is very hard
to monitor. The data sources are poor; the numbers upon which all
these estimates are based are benchmarked to shaky data after long
lags.
We could be blind sided. But as a Wall Street Journal article,
I think of yesterday, suggested, there's a very powerful momentum here
as one looks back at history. There are very strong demands for
services; there are various imperatives. The prisons have to be
staffed; there is a backlog of infrastructure investment that has to
be attended to.
So, though I think the risks here are reasonably
balanced, there is an upside potential beyond our forecast as well as
the possibility of some shortfall.
MR. PARRY. One of the things that is most troubling about
the California situation is that basically it isn't a cyclical
problem; it clearly is a problem that is structural in nature.
And
that's why I think the limitations on the growth of spending and to
some extent also the taxes are likely to be permanent as opposed to
something to deal with the short-run problems.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Lee.

MR. HOSKINS.
In the same vein, I guess:
Have you looked
back at the Greenbook to see if, at this point in the cycle, there's a
systematic error?
Do we tend to underestimate the expansion?
My
intuitive notion is that we underestimate money growth rates, we
underestimate the expansion, and we underestimate the rate of increase
in inflation. Do you have any feel for that?
MR. PRELL. We have on occasion studied that.
Certainly,
I've warned for some time now that most forecasters tend to
underestimate the amplitude of expansions; maybe the same is true of
recessions. But I've been conscious of the fact that by presenting
these highlights of the forecast the way I have that I have focused
somewhat on the negatives because I'm trying to explain why we're
expecting something well short of the norm. But I think these do
stand out--for example, the state and local sector--as something
unusual in a cyclical context. The restraint on federal spending,
given the budget laws that have been put in place, is an innovation
that may suggest a departure from the past.
It stood up through the
recession period; now, we will be into a recovery period; presumably
that won't even give them the option that they had so readily if they
had wanted to set aside the constraints. And in the construction
sector, as I've illustrated, the imbalances seem to be well beyond
anything in recent experience. So, I think there are some real
negatives.
Now, we could get surprises. We might do better in
international trade than we have in the forecast; businesses may feel
a greater urgency to modernize their equipment and improve
productivity thereby. Maybe we can get an impulse there.
If
everything went well, maybe consumers would find the wherewithal to
increase their spending relative to income. But, as I illustrated,
barring a radical revision to the personal saving rate, we're really

7/2-3/91

in very low territory. So, I think in each of these cases there are
risks on the up side and the down side; but they add up to something
that suggests to us that we're going to fall short of past norms.
MR. PARRY.
bit of a difficulty

Using the average for the past may be a little
[unintelligible].

There are

[recovery periods]--I

think after the '80 and '69-'70 recessions--with increases in the
first year that were actually smaller than what you're forecasting.
So, there are some precedents; both [of those recoveries] were
moderate.
MR. PRELL. Well, there has been only one since the Korean
War, I think, that had less than 6 percent growth for the first year-ruling out the abortive '80 cyclical expansion because that ended so
quickly.
MR. PARRY.

'69-70?

MR. PRELL. Right. So, this is a distinct outlier, which
gives me some hesitation. Indeed, one of the features of the
recession thus far has been a quite healthy inventory liquidation.
And that is probably part of the correlation one sees between the
depth of the recession and the size of the rebound. In this case
we're looking for a sizable inventory swing because of how strong the
liquidation has been. Yet we're saying the final demands are going to
hold down this overall upswing. Obviously, none of this is certain
and we recognize the risks on both sides.
MR. HOSKINS. Just to follow up, though maybe it's more a
How do you get this--to me, troublesome-question for Don later on:
5-1/2 percent money growth [assumption] in the Greenbook? Do you view
that as a monetary stimulus? Do you view it as a neutral [factor],
even though it's an increase in money growth? I'm not sure how you
get your forecast. Do you start with nominal [GNP] and back out money
and velocity or-MR. PRELL. Well, I think we back out money via a velocity or
money demand relationship, having derived a forecast using some
interest rate assumption--in this case stability of the federal funds
rate. That is the assumption made.
MR. HOSKINS. Then you'll have a very unusual velocity
behavior for this recovery, because there hasn't been a recovery that
has had positive velocity--at least in the last four.
MR. PRELL. There hasn't been a recovery in which interest
rates came in absolutely stable in the short end either.
MR. HOSKINS.

Sure.

MR. PRELL. I recognize the artificiality of this but, as Don
will be exploring, I'm sure, there are special factors in the
environment that condition our expectations about velocity.
MR. PARRY.

Do you see faster money growth?

7/2-3/91

MR. HOSKINS. We usually have money growth for eight quarters
after recovery starts that is a couple of points faster than the trend
rate prior to the recession.
MR. PARRY.
MR. HOSKINS.
quarters on average.
MR. PARRY.

Right.
And velocity is usually negative for eight
Right.

MR. PRELL. I did note that one of the things that suggests
to us that possibly there's less of a monetary impulse to this
recovery is the fact that thus far we haven't seen much of an
acceleration in money stock.
If you look at real M2 in past cycles,
for example, it's very clear that around the troughs and early in
recoveries there typically has been very marked acceleration.
MR. KOHN.
I can address this now since the subject has been
raised, and I'll skip it when I get to my briefing. We see a couple
of things that are different this time than in past recoveries.
First, we are still predicting some further downward shifts in money
demand. We've had a history over the last year of money falling short
of what we'd expect, given nominal income and interest rates.
Based
on historical experience, we're predicting that that will continue,
although at diminishing rates.
So, we have some downward shifts of
money demand that we haven't had in previous expansions.
Secondly, we
came in, as Mike just said, with a less steeply sloped downward
I believe that a lot of the extra money
trajectory of interest rates.
we got early in an expansion before was a lagged effect of the
previous stimulus coming in. And we have considerably less stimulus
coming into this trough, in terms of the trajectory of the federal
funds rate, other interest rates, and certainly long-term interest
Third, this is the first
rates, than we've had in other expansions.
expansion we've ever had without Reg Q or without Reg Q being removed.
Look at 1983.
A huge portion of the M2 growth in the first year of
that expansion was the result of MMDAs and the removal of Reg Q
ceilings. So, we don't believe that deposit rates have been held
below equilibrium over the last couple of years as they probably were
in a Reg Q environment. We are predicting that deposit rates could
edge down even further in the first couple of quarters of this
expansion. That will raise opportunity costs and damp M2 demands.
So,'those are the three factors that we think differentiate this from
previous expansion periods.
MR. HOSKINS.
My point was that there is a rationale; I
anticipated it, and it's a sensible argument. The problem, as we look
back over 30 years of M2, is that all kinds of special factors have
occurred and yet if we ran M2 at 3 percent forever we seem to get to
price stability.
So it troubles me because we're moving away from a
trend rate that we worked very hard for four years to bring down to 4
percent, and it's causing me some concerns. All I'm saying is that
there is a lot of slippage in terms of forecasting these things, and I
don't put a lot of confidence in these relationships.
I think we've emphasized that the kind of money
MR. PRELL.
stock growth that we're anticipating over the next year and a half
could not be sustained over the subsequent years and [remain

7/2-3/91

consistent with a] move toward that significantly lower inflation
you're seeking. So, yes, this would have to be a transitory
phenomenon; if you want to move toward price stability, [M2 growth]
has to move significantly lower and, obviously, there are alternatives
in the Bluebook that describe such a path.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, I want to raise one last point and that's
your sacrifice ratios that are involved here.
If you ran a forwardlooking model with forward-looking expectations, then I think you
would get a different picture.
MR. PRELL. I think in essence we've really embodied in this
forecast a bit more favorable sacrifice ratio than some of our models
would predict. But, indeed, we have not assumed that within this time
span we're going to get an improved tradeoff coming from enhanced
credibility and so on. But if moderate policies are pursued and it's
clear that we are pursuing that objective wholeheartedly, then one
might expect that tradeoff to improve over time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Lee Hoskins has almost asked my question, but
not quite. These scenarios really have been very helpful and the
presentation was helpful, but I suppose it's always natural that
somebody wants something else. And the one item that I would like to
That
have had, of course, would have been the one that we control.
is, I'd like to have seen an alternative scenario of keeping money
What happens over '91, '92, and '93 if, instead
growth at 4 percent.
of keeping the fed funds rate constant, we keep M2 constant at 4
percent--which would be identical to the rate it has grown over the
last three years and identical to its growth rate from Q4 1990 to the
present time?
MR. PRELL.
Governor Angell, the alternative II strategy on
page 9 of the Bluebook is an approximation; it has 4-1/2 percent M2.
MR. HOSKINS.
That's the disturbing page that has the
baseline for three years at 5-1/2 percent money growth.
MR. ANGELL.

Okay.

MR. PRELL. As you can see, we get into the vicinity of price
stability by 1995, with allowances for measurement questions and so
on. We're certainly close, if we're not there.
MR. ANGELL.
Yes, it really does. Thank you;
missed that. And the real GNP sacrifice is how much?
much in the out years.

I'm sorry I
It's not very

MR. PRELL. Well, the model says that roughly 1 percentage
point of extra unemployment for a year gives you a 1/2 percentage
point reduction in inflation, and we have not built in additional
credibility effects that could improve that tradeoff as time
progresses.
So, it might well be that one could achieve, with the
same unemployment path or a better unemployment path, as good or
better price performance by the mid-1990s.

7/2-3/91

-10-

MR. ANGELL. But that path shows unemployment rates actually
accelerating through the period. Does that seem surprising to you?
MR. KOHN. Well, in the staff's estimation, in order to hold
down money growth and nominal GNP, you have to have higher real
interest rates.
And in order to get this kind of price performance by
'95 you have to hold [real rates] up there and the unemployment rate
has to be high.
Clearly, we could have fine-tuned this to some extent
to get a little more unemployment now and a little less later.
I was
bothered also by this accelerating path of unemployment.
MR. ANGELL.

Okay.

MR. KOHN. But I think the basic point there is that without
credibility effects and the sacrifice ratio somewhere in the
neighborhood of 2 or a little less, you're going to have to have quite
a bit of unemployment to get price stability or something approaching
price stability by 1995.
MR. ANGELL. But if you were fine-tuning it, Don, then you
would probably take the 6-1/2 percent 1992 unemployment rate up a bit
and maybe take down the 7-1/4 percent.
MR. KOHN.

Yes.

MR. PRELL. Well, there's another option.
I think Don
considered getting into this--and he's discussed it in the past--that
there is this entry problem as you approach price stability.
In a
sense you're going to overshoot unless you bring that unemployment
rate down fairly rapidly by around 1996.
So, what one would do
presumably is accommodate some faster growth out in '94 and '95 and
then you would have a smoother landing as you went toward price
stability. This just goes mechanically throughout without the kind of
fine-tuning that one could do here.
MR. ANGELL. Yes.
MR. PRELL.
employment-MR. ANGELL.
wanted you to do!
MR. BLACK.

So, that maybe overstates the bleakness of the
Well, thank you for doing precisely what I
Except they had it a point too high!

MR. HOSKINS.
Just one question on the baseline. One way to
do a baseline would be to take the past growth rates. You must have
something else in mind.
MR. KOHN. Well, the baseline was the extension of the staff
Greenbook forecast. So, we had the 5-1/2 percent we're projecting for
the next 18 months.
Then we extended that through '93 with the
judgmental forecast and also through '94 and '95.
We didn't set out
with a 5-1/2 percent rule. What we did was to set out what we thought
was a policy strategy:
that is, to bring the unemployment rate down
gradually but to bring the inflation rate down gradually at the same
time. Recognize that if you're going to continue to bring the
inflation rate down, you can't have the unemployment rate at or below

-11-

7/2-3/91

the natural rate. And these money growth rates fell out of that
calculation. We didn't say:
"Let's do 5-1/2 percent forever and see
It was an accident of the relationship of nominal GNP
what happens."
and interest rates.
MR. HOSKINS.
Some people will judge policy change as a
change in the monetary growth rate.
MR. KOHN.

Right.

MR. HOSKINS.
And so for them a baseline would be just a
consistent growth rate; and that's obviously my problem.
MR. PRELL. Well, we tried to describe what our baseline
meant because, as Don described, it was an extension of the Greenbook
forecast assuming that you are going to leave some small margin of
slack to bring down the unemployment rate gradually.
MR. HOSKINS.

I understand that.

MR. PARRY. My recollection of our discussion of the natural
rate of unemployment in March was that it was about 5 percent.
MR. PRELL. We found a range of estimates from about 5-1/2 to
6 percent, and we've determined that we would bet on something closer
to the 5-1/2 percent.
MR. PARRY. But then you said you used the MPS model for
taking this out.
And the MPS model has what--6.2 or 6 percent?
MR. PRELL.
It has been adjusted to be consistent with the
judgmental assessment.
MR. PARRY.

Oh, I see.

So you made a judgmental assessment.

Okay.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Mike, you mentioned in passing your estimation
of zero inflation as 1-1/4 percent, given the measurement bias?
I was speaking loosely, but I think one could
MR. PRELL.
make the case that something in the 1 percent vicinity might be
consistent, when you allow for the possibilities of substitution, look
at quality change measurement problems, and so on. But that's
[likely] to be settled when we get closer-MR. MULLINS. Yes, I know it may be premature to talk about
that, but when the time comes-MR. PRELL.

We have a study already in process.

MR. MULLINS. When the time comes, if my term isn't up yet,
which is in '96, we might have a little more background work on that,
I agree.
MR. BLACK.
now.

My term will be up; I sure would like to know

7/2-3/91

-12-

SPEAKER(?).

We'll send you a postcard!

MR. PRELL.
In fact, we'd be happy to distribute a paper by
some staff members that was presented at the AEA meetings last
December, which addresses this very question as a first cut.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for the gentlemen?
If not, who would like to start the Committee discussion?
MR. MCTEER. Texas and the Eleventh District continue to lag
the national economy.
In the fall that was an advantage that we had;
our employment kept growing while the downturn in the national economy
was occurring. That came to an end in January and February and we're
now lagging on the wrong end. We had a weak May.
I could see that
May was our first month with expansion nationally. When we went into
the recession in the fall, rising oil prices helped cushion our
economy in the Southwest and now falling natural gas prices have been
a problem of considerable concern. They have been low and declining
for quite a while.
A lot of the factors that have been cited here
today as being a possible drag on the recovery nationally are factors
also in the Eleventh District.
I don't believe it has been mentioned
today, but the perceptions have not changed out there; the credit
crunch is still with us and is real.
The banks are healing; they are
becoming profitable and their measures are improving. But they are
not lending at the moment, as far as we can tell.
The decline in bank
credit continues and they're getting illiquid, but the lending to
small businesses has not really accelerated. And that's the
impression that most of the people I talk to have.
Fiscal drag is also a reality in the Eleventh District
states, particularly in Texas; we hear more and more talk of service
cutbacks and layoffs and/or higher taxes. And Texas is debating the
question of whether to have an income tax for the first time in a long
time. But it's certain that there's going to be some sort of fiscal
constraint for some time to come. There's a good bit of concern about
defense expenditures--defense cutbacks and base closings. We had five
bases on the chopping block the last couple of days and three of them
were axed. That, of course, is going to occur over time but it does
affect current behavior as people anticipate the loss of about 7,000
jobs in the Fort Worth area and a bit less in-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The loss of Lyndon Johnson!

MR. ANGELL.

And Jim Wright!

MR. KELLEY.

And Sam Rayburn!

MR. MCTEER.

That's all I wanted to say.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Bob Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I hate to say this because it may
be a source of worry and concern for the staff, but our projection for
'91 is almost exactly what you all have.
So, you may want to go back
and check yours! As I read the Greenbook, adjusting for the swings in
the overseas earnings of oil companies, it's pretty clear that the
[recession] must have hit bottom in the second quarter.
That's a
reasonable conclusion based on what we know about the April and May

7/2-3/91

-13-

Whatever the
figures and the little we know about the June figures.
final record does show, I don't think the bottom will come any later
than July in view of this evidence we have of increased consumer
spending and strength in residential construction. In any case, I

think that the staff's 1991 projections are very plausible and that
the risks of error are about equal on both sides for both real GNP and
inflation.
When we get to '92, however, we differ right much. We are
much more optimistic on both the growth side and on the inflation
side. We're projecting about 1/2 percentage point more growth in real
GNP and we're forecasting only a 3 percent rise in the CPI, which is
about 3/4 of a point lower than the Greenbook and well below most
other forecasts that we've seen. Now, I need to emphasize something
that we have already alluded to earlier, and that is that our staff's
1992 projections are based, in accordance with our instructions, on
what we would regard as an appropriate monetary policy in the next six
quarters. So, what we've done is to assume that M2 will come in
slightly above the midpoint of its current range this year and that
the FOMC will lower the range for 1992 to 2 to 6 percent and will hold
the actual growth of money within that range. This assumption of a
lower target range for 1992 has a direct bearing on our projection
since we believe, given the background of very favorable behavior in
the money supply over the last few years, that reducing the range
further would increase significantly the credibility of our antiinflationary strategy and, consequently, would result in a more
favorable division of nominal GNP between real growth and inflation-because of [how we factor in] forward-looking expectations, Lee. And
If we achieve what we think
without that strategy [unintelligible].
are these highly plausible results, then we think the prospects of the
subsequent years after 1992 will be very bright indeed. I think we
have a real opportunity here to make significant progress--the best
we've had since I've been around.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The coffee is here and I neglected to
take the break; I notice everyone is running for coffee, so why don't
we take a short break and come back in 5 minutes?
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

President Parry.

Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Begin, s'il vous plait!

MR. PARRY. After a relatively strong performance during much
of the national recession, more recently the Twelfth District's
economy has actually weakened. Total District employment fell on a
month-to-month basis in February, March, April, and May. The February
and March declines were due to weaknesses only in California; but
employment losses elsewhere in the District account for the April and
May declines. However, I should point out that total District
employment still remains 0.4 of a percent above the May 1990 level,
with California the only District state to lose employment over the
year. District residential property sales picked up this spring; in
May, we saw the fourth consecutive month of increased sales activity
and increased median home prices in California. However, it appears

7/2-3/91

-14-

as though construction activity has not rebounded yet.

Boeing

recently announced a major expansion of its Puget Sound area
facilities. Facilities will be built or expanded at about 25 sites in
the area and the construction cost is estimated at almost $3 billion
over the next two years.
Most of the facilities will support
production of Boeing's commercial aircraft, including the 737, the
767, and the new 777.
Turning to the national outlook, our view is not really much

different from that presented in the Greenbook. In the near term, we
expect the main sources of recovery to be increases in personal
consumption spending and also a short-lived inventory swing. Next
year consumption will continue to support GNP in our forecast and
there should be something of a turnaround in business equipment
spending. Like the Greenbook, we expect a decline in inflation over
the next year and a half. Indeed, it seems to us that there is a fair
chance that CPI inflation could be brought down in 1992 to as low as
the 3 percent that Bob Black mentioned. Much of this improvement
clearly reflects the existence of considerable slack in the economy.
However, a good part also stems from the recent appreciation of the
dollar and, therefore, may not be of a permanent nature. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. While the economic
data that we've been receiving in the Sixth District tend to confirm
that the recovery is at a turning point, if it hasn't already turned,
clearly we still have some soft spots to contend with. Our contacts
are reporting that there is lots of traffic in the stores and in the
shopping malls but that spending has been fairly restrained to date.
Where we are getting sales, they are concentrated primarily in apparel
and home furnishings. Our recovery in home sales that has been going
on for a while continues, and permits are up in most states of the
District. We continue to have the problem that is associated with
other places around the country: namely, the empty office buildings
and retail spaces as well as excess capacity in manufacturing. And
all of these things are tending to diminish business fixed investment.
Orders and sales of apparel, household products, textiles, and
packaging are increasing, which is good news. On the other hand,
orders for autos, auto parts, and other consumer durables are either
declining or flat. Our exports are about as they were at the time of
the last FOMC meeting; that is, we're not doing as well in exports as
the rest of the country, although one producer of telecommunications
equipment recently reported strong gains in exports, particularly to
Japan, which I thought was interesting. On the state problem that
we've all been talking about, the three most populous states in the
Sixth District--Florida, Georgia, and Tennessee--have now increased
their estimates of budget shortfalls and they're attempting to deal
with these in a variety of ways. Florida has a freeze on state
employment; Tennessee tried to push through a state income tax but
failed; and in Georgia there are just tightening budget constraints.
The credit crunch seems to be abating somewhat, although the demand
for loans is still very, very soft. One banker told me that his loan
demand has picked up considerably but unfortunately none of the
applicants was creditworthy!
[Laughter]
I don't know whether we want
to count that or not. The agricultural situation has been dampened-no pun intended--by very heavy rains, which are beginning to
[moderate] a bit so the farmers are now getting out into the fields.

-15-

7/2-3/91

That's the picture in the Sixth District; it's a little better than
the last time we reported, although there are some soft spots, as I've
indicated.
With respect to the national economy, we have some
differences from the Greenbook forecast with respect both to growth
and inflation. And the differences are magnified by the fourthquarter-over-fourth-quarter comparison; they're not quite as extreme
if you look at the annual averages. We have less growth in the early
stages of the recovery as well as higher inflation. Both of those
tend to even out and come a little closer to the Greenbook as we get
further out into the forecast. Without going through all of the
sectors, it seems to me that the basic difference from the Greenbook
is that we're showing a slower pace of growth in the labor force than
does the Board staff over the forecast horizon. This gives us less
growth and amounts to a more pessimistic view on our part. What it
comes down to, it seems to me, is that we're simply getting less
improvement on the wage front. On that score I also don't see in our
forecast very much improvement in the services sector, and that's
something that perhaps we ought to be looking at a little more
carefully as time goes on. What I'm more concerned about than any of
that, though, is the continued fragility in the financial system. I
think that's a shock that could come and kick us one of these days.
It's not only the actual condition of some of the banks around the
country and in my District as well but the continued publicity and
pessimistic reports that are coming from the various agencies in
Washington. That is having a very, very negative effect on people's
attitudes toward banking and their basic confidence in the economic
system. I think that's unfortunate and I hope it doesn't deteriorate
to the point where it has an effect on the recovery itself.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The District's
economic growth continues to improve, with agriculture being the
dominant source of that strength, but manufacturing and construction
continue to show some additional improvement. In the agricultural
sector, the harvest of wheat--a major agricultural product in the
District--has been virtually completed. They've gone through
Oklahoma, Kansas, and are now in eastern Nebraska. That wheat crop is
estimated to be something like 25 percent less than last year--last
year being a bumper crop. But the more important aspect is that wheat
prices are at very low levels. As a matter of fact, I think they're
now at the level that Wayne Angell experienced when he got out of high
[Laughter] The fact of the matter is that there
school 10 years ago!
will be a cash flow but it's just not an outstanding crop. Part of
the diminishment in the actual grain production of about 25 percent
comes from less planting acreage, but also there are fairly spotty
areas across the District in terms of either wet or dry [conditions]
or some infestation. Beyond that in the agricultural sector, cattle
prices have declined from their record levels but still remain a
principal source of cash flow for the farmers.
In manufacturing, the District automobile plants, with the
exception of the one in Kansas City, have been operating on a full
two-shift production schedule. And that plant in Kansas City, which
is a new GM plant, will be putting its second shift back on in
September, suggesting that those production schedules are gearing up

7/2-3/91

-16-

to meet what they hope to be sales. Construction activity in the
District also continues to improve. The building contract awards in
the District in April, for example, were nearly 25 percent above yearago levels and that was principally a result of public works projects,
or infrastructure kinds of projects. However, the residential and the
nonresidential contracts have shown improvement over year-ago levels,
so there is some hope that those will continue and we will not have
another downturn in that area.
The energy sector has been a dead
issue in the sense that prices are such that it just does not
encourage any new exploration; indeed, they've shut down some of the
small producing, stripper-type wells as a result of the current oil
prices and projections of prices in the future. On the other side,
natural gas prices, which the Tenth District probably is better known
for--it has a greater supply of natural gas certainly than of
petroleum--continue to deteriorate and as a result there's not great
euphoria in that area.
On the national level, we're not greatly different from the
Greenbook forecast but, like Mr. Forrestal, we have a little different
For example, we do not show in the last half of 1991 as much
pattern.
vigor in the economy as the staff does. As best as I can determine,
looking at the relative figures, the staff has a fairly sharp comeback
in inventories which we do not have. On the other hand, in 1992 we're
a bit stronger than they are and the averages for the next six
quarters together are right on the button at about 3-3/4 percent
growth through that period and in 1993.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As far as the First
District goes, I'd say that there has not been much change.
It's
pretty clear at this point that the District has been through its most
wrenching adjustment since World War II.
A lot of that, obviously, is
because of the bubble that we were coming out of.
Much has to do with
specific problems that are not sensitive to the U.S. economy.
In
manufacturing, we have almost weekly announcements of layoffs; a lot
of them have to do with some specific problems in our high-tech
industry.
In the defense sector, we have announcements of shutdowns
of plants; but that has to do with Tip O'Neill not being Speaker [of
the House]; they're not sensitive to macro policy.
Outside of the
high-tech area, the encouraging sign that we get in talking to
manufacturers is that the general trend seems to be that things aren't
getting any worse and about half of them seem to see things getting
somewhat better.
They do have a very, very cautious approach to
capital spending. Generally, we don't see any problems with
inventories and I'm seeing a favorable price performance from their
suppliers. As far as retail sales go, consistent with what has
happened in other Districts, ex-autos we have seen some significant
pickup in our District. But we've had very, very warm weather and
that probably is part of it.
In the real estate sector, as has been
mentioned in several other cases, we have serious problems remaining.
Probably the best estimates are that we have about 54 million square
feet of vacant space.
Even if we were to get a recovery fairly soon,
optimistically we would be looking at an absorption rate of 4 or 5
million, tops, of that space.
So, it just looks as if we have a ways
to go there.
That, of course, has had very, very serious effects and
we're a long way from being out of the woods.
In terms of our
financial sector, there is a lot of discussion on talk radio about

7/2-3/91

-17-

that.
I suppose the favorable aspect of it is that it doesn't seem to
affect--except in a broader consumer confidence sense--people's
behavior. People are not running from one bank to another; they feel
quite secure with there being federal insurance. And some people are
saying they've been through three institutions and they expect they'll
go through a couple more before they get to another situation. We do
have some feeling that a credit crunch is still going on but, again
consistent with what Bob Forrestal said, loan demand for projects or
enterprises one would want to finance is quite weak. In the
residential sector we are seeing some pickup in housing; that has
continued. That is not reflected in production yet, though, because
of the overhang that we still have.
As far as the national economy goes, I have very little to
add to the Greenbook forecast.
I am comfortable with the forecast
both in terms of its likelihood and also in thinking that it's not a
bad situation to have evolve. One can't help but be struck, as was
pointed out by Mike in his presentation, by the unusual nature of this
recovery--the importance of inventory swings and of exports in terms
And I think all of this means that
of what we're looking forward to.
we almost certainly have reached the bottom; but there are significant
uncertainties about the upswing. Although hopefully not gratuitously,
I find myself comfortable with the staff's assumption of what the
baseline is because on a somewhat [capriciously] velocity-adjusted M2
basis I consider that to be about what we had built into the baseline.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. First, with regard to
the national economy, our forecast is very similar to the staff's
forecast. The differences are really very much at the margin. Maybe
my memory is faulty, but it's interesting that the range of the
members' forecasts this time, particularly for real GNP, seems a bit
Our outlook is a little
narrower than I ever remember in the past.
more modest than the staff forecast for both this year and next.
I
think, like Roger Guffey, that the main difference is in the inventory
Although the staff forecast would suggest a somewhat smaller
area.
inventory swing this time than in the past, nonetheless, our numbers
I think the other differences
are even a bit more modest than that.
really are very modest and our numbers line up reasonably well.
With regard to the District, there are increasing signs that
we have reached stabilization and I think the prospect for renewed
growth has improved quite a good deal since the last meeting.
District employment was essentially unchanged in May after declining
significantly in April and, as we [survey] the hiring plans for the
third quarter, the employment situation looks to be getting better.
As always, the auto sector is absolutely key to the District and, of
course, we are in the model changeover period and there is an awful
lot of uncertainty out there. But I think on balance--maybe it's
because people are looking to a new model--that the attitudes are a
little more positive. And we would anticipate that production
schedules in the third quarter would add a full percentage point to
the GNP. Even though auto inventories at retail are in good balance,
nonetheless, I think the production risks continue to be on the weak
side.
Given the results of the 1991 model year, any way you look at
it there is an awful lot of nervousness about the 1992 models, and we
aren't going to know the market reaction to all this until later this

7/2-3/91

-18-

month and really into August. But the dealer attitudes are better;
fewer are operating in loss positions now than was the case before and
in general, as I say, the auto industry attitude is a little more
positive. This is working down into the supplier sector. The steel
business is a bit better than was the case at the time of the last
meeting. The forecast of shipments for the year has been moved up a
bit to 77-78 million tons. And the initial outlook for next year--at
this point it has to be very [preliminary]--is that shipments will

come in at about 80 million tons. But still, it's important to
remember that these numbers are significantly lower than the 85
million tons that were shipped in 1990. In the capital goods area, an
awful lot of weakness continues. Construction orders still are well
below last year; the machine tool business is soft. Heavy truck sales
this year are about 15 percent lower than was the case last year,
which was not a very good year.
In the agricultural sector, we have a couple of interesting
dichotomies. First, starting with the weather: Parts of Iowa are
very wet--much too wet in fact to get into the fields; but some parts
of Indiana haven't had enough rain. Nonetheless, on balance, with any
reasonable luck on growing conditions it should be a good production
year. The planting is about completed in the District. For some,
though, I would say it was the latest planting that they've
experienced in a great many years. And the latest Agriculture
Department survey on planting would suggest that District corn and
soybean acreage is up just a bit this year, which brings the other
dichotomy forward: namely, food prices. Because of the increased
acreage and significantly lower export opportunities, the carryover
stocks this year are likely to be heavy, and prices are under
significant [downward] pressure. Corn and soybean prices particularly
are under a lot of pressure. Therefore, farm income is going to be
down, and I am beginning to hear some bad news out of some parts of
the agricultural sector that are a little more highly leveraged than
others. We could have some more problems there.
On the inflation front, the news continues to be good and the
outlook is even better. Materials prices are under a lot of
[downward] pressure and competitive conditions continue to be very
heavy. For some of the large manufacturers whom I talk to, the
increases in their purchase prices this year are lower than last year.
One very large manufacturer that I talk to from time to time says that
in fact they have a lot of leverage; they have been able to achieve a
decrease in the overall cost of their raw materials and other
purchased products this year. So, they've accomplished a good deal.
Labor contracts continue to be favorable, with fairly long contracts
and good terms. But I would caution that there are at least two major
contracts in the District coming up this fall that could make a
difference. But, net, District conditions seem to have stabilized,
albeit at a fairly low level, and people's outlooks seem to be much
more positive than at the time of the last meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you. If you go through the District
economy sector by sector, I think you conclude that conditions are
mixed. That is, you can find some sectors that are doing reasonably
well and others that are not. On the other hand, if you cut it
differently and ask how the second quarter looks compared to the

-19-

7/2-3/91

first, almost universally I think people would report that the second
quarter looks a good deal better than the first. Some of that is
undoubtedly seasonal but, even discounting for that, it is pretty
obvious from the reports we get from our directors and advisory
council members and so forth that the economy in the District clearly
did better in the second quarter.
With regard to the national outlook, I find myself quite
comfortable with the Greenbook forecast, primarily for one important
reason that I think some people were getting at earlier. Presumably,
the path of the economy isn't independent of the policies pursued.
Following the '81-'82 recession we had a massive tax cut and
expansionary monetary policy for at least some time. If memory serves
me correctly, we had some of the same kind of policy mix coming out of
'73-'75, and it wasn't surprising that we had a very strong expansion.
I think we will get a modest expansion this time, basically because I
don't think we're going to see fiscal stimulus and I'm assuming we
will not see much in the way of monetary stimulus. So those things go
hand-in-hand, and I think they give us the kind of path for the
economy that the Greenbook suggests.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, my story has largely been told. I think
the Philadelphia District is much in line with what is going on in
most of the country. We're in the process of bottoming out but
there's no lift-off yet. I would say attitudes in the business and
banking community are hopeful but still cautious. Business people
don't read as much into a tenth or two increase from month-to-month as
do analysts. I think they tend to look more at their absolute level
of output in business and they still see that business is low even
though it's stabilizing. One gets the sense that a little good news
would go a long way toward substantially improving confidence. I
think the other side is true, too: Bad news would have a magnified
effect in the pessimistic direction. But I think things have
stabilized and attitudes are lagging some and will probably catch up.
I can ditto pretty much what Bob Forrestal said about credit
conditions and banks. I'm getting more calls than I would like from
bankers who basically are saying "I told my board that at the end of
the year I was taking a big write-off and I ought to have most of it
behind us; now I'm coming back and going to have to put in for some
more."
I think the worst is over but there's still bad news coming
out. And that does feed into this vulnerability issue concerning the
financial sector. People are just being bombarded with it; to me it's
the largest vulnerability that we have. I think you would find that
credit demand is still weak. Business people will say there is a
credit crunch while the bankers will say there is no credit crunch but
they just need to make good loans. I think that is still there.
As far as the forecast goes, I think the staff is broadly
correct in forecasting a modest upturn for all the reasons that have
been given. I would see perhaps less growth in the second half of
this year and more next year, simply because there are these cautious
attitudes out there. Lots of business people are largely writing off
'90 and '91 and looking more toward '92. But that's certainly a
subtle difference, and I think the broad contours are correct.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

7/2-3/91

-20-

MR. ANGELL. My forecast for nominal GNP is a little lower
than the staff's for the four quarters ending in the fourth quarter of
'91.
Frankly, I think I would be more comfortable if I were a
disinterested party looking at the Board staff's forecast than I would
with my own because mine seems somewhat extreme to me in some ways.
Yet I think I'm looking at the very same things that Mike Prell has
looked at in terms of modifying his forecast to a less-than-exuberant
recovery. But Don is certainly correct when he suggests that Reg Q is
not [a factor] this time, and I think that does mean some very
different things for money growth.
[Several] of you have mentioned
the tax and fiscal policies, and I think that has to be noted as a
difference this time around. That is, quite often we get either some
more liberal or faster depreciation of capital rules or investment tax
credit or a reduction of capital gains tax; there's always some deal
out there, and this time there is no deal out there. We have to
remember that this time we're also not getting any action in the long
If you take either the 12 months before the
bond as we ordinarily do.
recession started or take a point halfway into the recession, which
would be all of 1990, long bond rates in 1991 don't move [in a way
that suggests] they're going to be any different than 1990 long bond
rates.
So, that's quite an adverse factor for the residential real
estate sector that needs recovery. Ordinarily, we find that household
expenditures do seem to relate to what happens to home starts--not
just appliances but crazy things like automobiles seem also to be
related.
I think we have a consumer out there who is also more
damaged in regard to his exuberance for the future than we've seen in
I just don't think there's a
all of the post-World War II recoveries.
lot of enthusiasm for borrowing and spending. Finally, the
realization by many consumers that there is no tax deductibility on
their interest charges is a factor there. So, this seems to be a
I know, Mike, that you have it
consumer who is behaving differently.
in your numbers, too; I'm just taking it down a step more than you
did, which is probably too extreme to be worth much. But that tends
also to get me a little better picture in regard to the imports; that
is, I think the consumer is being a little less exuberant so I do not
expect the rebound in imports that the staff has in its projection.
What really worries me is that we have not had the kind of
That is, given
price effect that it seems to me we should have had.
the money growth rates, given the slack that's in the economy, and
given this recession effect, it doesn't seem to be there. Why have
commodity prices failed to decline as much as they ordinarily would
Now, it also looks as if commodity prices
during recession periods?
So,
are not spiking upward in a recovery like they ordinarily would.
we have a different picture in commodity prices than I've seen in a
At the same time that
recession and, frankly, I'm very puzzled by it.
commodity prices do not show the extent of the recovery, I think it's
somewhat strange that gold prices failed to move down. Given central
banks' reduced willingness to own gold, or given what I see as a
reluctance in the foreign central banks and others to hold as large
gold stocks, given countries in southeast Asia who have changed their
attitudes [toward gold], and given the Soviet Union [sales], I don't
It suggests to me that
understand why gold prices do not come down.
there may be some what we call "crazies" out there who believe that
And I guess I think that [inflation
gold is a good [inflation hedge].
concern] is in the long bond.

-21-

7/2-3/91

On money growth, I do not expect 5-1/2 percent money growth
with interest rates staying where they are. With interest rates
staying at current levels, I expect lower money growth--more like what
we've seen. So, I do not see that it takes a dramatic run-up in
short-term interest rates in order to keep money growth at 4 percent.
Well, that's a contrary and rather rambling indication of my being
So, I don't have much confidence in my
perplexed by what is going on.
forecast, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I think the direction of the
economy, as indicated by the recent news, is obviously up. And I have
a good deal of confidence that indeed we are in a recovery mode and
that the staff projection is a reasonable one. My concern is that the
recovery doesn't abort along the way. Without being able to identify
possible external shocks that might stall out the recovery, I continue
to think the downside risk is significant. And I believe that it is
centered in the financial system. Although the stock market continues
to surprise me by its strength, I'm concerned that continued weakness
in corporate profits and another spate of bad news about the banks
could cause the market to retreat and the confidence of both consumers
and bankers to evaporate. Without more vigorous lending by banks and
the concurrent demand from both consumers and businesses, the recovery
could run out of gas.
I don't see the banks exhibiting rosier cheeks
much before the first quarter of next year, which makes the next six
months critical. And in that kind of an environment, we need to
remain flexible and tactically nimble in these months ahead. Given
all that, I would favor keeping the range for M2 growth just where it
is.
It might be a serious mistake to signal our intent to slow the
growth in the aggregates before we have confirmation of the strength
of the recovery.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The economic forecast that my
associates in New York have put together is not now materially or
systematically different from Mike's forecast; there are some
differences around the edges.
In listening to the talk around the
table, Mr. Chairman, I'm inclined to the view that Mr. Prell and his
colleagues perhaps should qualify for a gold star either for
forecasting or for courage in standing pat against the skepticism of
many of us around the table for the past six months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

With an oak leaf cluster!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. With an oak leaf cluster! You're
not there yet, Mike, but you look a heck of a lot better than we
I do think it's a great tribute to Mike and his colleagues
thought.
that they were willing to stand pat, essentially, with their forecast
Now, it's
when a lot of people, including myself, weren't buying it.
not in the barn as Roger Guffey would say--or the bin, I guess.
I
never get those two things straight, bins and barns, but-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Barn is for hogs;

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
out in the Ninth District, too!

Okay.

[I had]

bin is for corn.
good training;

I was

7/2-3/91

-22-

MR. BLACK.

You left too soon!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I left too soon.
In terms of the
anecdotal [evidence], I can say that even among the industrial sector
types that I talk to, if nothing else, the decibel count is down a
bit.
And if you try really hard, you can even find one or two here
and there that acknowledge that something looks a little better.
If
that's not confirmation, Mike, I don't know what is!
Having said
that, there still is, of course, a not-so-silent minority who remain
concerned about a double-dip.
And something that surprised me a
little is that we actually hear a little more these days about the
credit crunch than maybe we did even six months ago.
That may just be
some people smelling the coffee for the first time; nevertheless,
certainly that was the impression I had with the fall meeting of our
Small Business Advisory Council as opposed to the last two meetings
when they were in.
I do agree with John LaWare, Bob Forrestal, Ed
Boehne, and perhaps others, who have made the point that in terms of
the near-term risks, the financial fragility factor probably looms as
the largest.
[The financial system] is still tender.
I think John's
comments about some of the events at the end of last week illustrate
that point.
On the other hand, and for what it's worth, we've just
gotten through examinations of a couple of the big banks that we
examine directly and I see some evidence, at least on the basis of
that small sample, that the rise in problem loans is stabilizing at a
high but, in these cases, not alarming level.
I'm also hearing
reports from my own examiners in connection with the shared-bank
credit review, Mr. Chairman, in cases where they are working jointly
with the Comptroller and the FDIC--for the first time certainly that
they're willing to talk to me about it and I don't know whether others
are picking this up as well--about rather sharp collisions between
examiners working on the same credits.
The suggestion is that the
other two agencies are differing sharply in some cases with my people
over classifications of the very same loans.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Which direction?

I don't know what to make
[Down.]
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
of that, except that I do have a fairly high degree of confidence in
my own examiners.
I don't know if others have picked this up or not.
MR. HOSKINS.

Only one.

MR. KEEHN.
Did you say that the difference is that they're
rating down versus your ratings?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

And they want

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. KEEHN.
MR. SYRON.
large institutions.
MR. KELLEY.

Yes.

That's what

a whole write-off.

Much lower.
I'm hearing.

That has definitely been our experience with our

Yes,

it

surely is.

-23-

7/2-3/91

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The worst case I know of involved a
fairly large credit, though not huge, where they even had differences
My guys were saying that they thought it should
in algebraic signs.
have been upgraded a notch and the dispute was to downgrade it a
notch. That's a big difference.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's a huge difference.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As I said, I don't know whether
other people have picked this up or not but I have been told this by
my own guys.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'm picking up the first part, but I
have not yet picked up different signs.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, that was one case; I don't
I mentioned that
want to make a big deal out of this isolated case.
just to be dramatic.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You have been!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But the point is that this is
It
unusual; this is not something that happens with great frequency.
doesn't happen often that there are material differences in judgment
among teams of examiners working on the same credit at the same time.
I cannot verify how widespread it is, but it's widespread enough that
it has been called to my attention in a couple of individual cases by
my own examiners. That's an aside; the main point is that the
financial tenderness, if I could put it that way, is still very much
in evidence.
Having said that, let me just add one other general point.
If what I hear to be the consensus around the table is correct in that
the recession is over and that at least a moderate recovery seems to
be taking hold, I think it's probably fair to say that in one sense we
really may have very successfully dodged the bullet because not only
are we looking at what historically would be a very modest recession
in all respects but a recession combined with other factors that I
think have produced some of the foundations that could really help us
out over the intermediate term. Now, Ted mentioned earlier the
improvement in the external sector. The numbers Ted is looking at now
compared to what we were looking at not too long ago really are a good
deal better. There has been a lot of talk about the prospective
improvement on the inflation front; not only is that improvement
If you look at the chart on page 12
absolute but it's also relative.
of Ted's handout, you find a very pronounced convergence in the
inflation rate in the United States versus those of Germany and Japan.
They're not the same but the gap has narrowed very appreciably.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We could cross Germany next year.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. ANGELL.

We could.

Well, I think we will.

It's really significant in terms not
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
The
just of the absolute improvement but the relative improvement.
cost containment going on throughout the economy, including in the

-24-

7/2-3/91

banking sector, I think bodes very well for the future. And
notwithstanding what Governor Angell said a moment ago, I think the
balance-sheet rebuilding that we're seeing in the corporate sector and
the household sector, while badly needed, is not an inconsequential
factor looking out over the intermediate term as well.
That is
another way of saying that if we don't screw it up, the outlook over
the next few years is a good deal better than we might have thought.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. We're at the low end of the central tendency for
the inflation outlook in '92, so we're very constructive on that
score.
I might add that that assumes a tighter monetary policy than I
think the baseline does.
I'm not sure about all these velocities and
so forth.
MR. HOSKINS.

They wash out over time.

MR. MELZER. Picking up on Jerry's last point and a little on
what Bob Black said earlier about the uniqueness of this opportunity
we have:
It took four years of good policy to get here and I hope we
don't screw it up, because I do think it's a very unique opportunity.
As far as current District activity goes, we have the same
pattern that I've described in recent months.
We're getting slight
employment growth and basic weakness in manufacturing--not as much
weakness as nationally--being offset by growth in nonmanufacturing.
And the particular weakness in manufacturing is in transportation-McDonnell Douglas and Chrysler, with the layoffs they've had in the
St. Louis area. And in nonmanufacturing, we're seeing strength in
services.
Somebody said earlier that they are not seeing that yet;
we're seeing that and we're also seeing a pickup in construction
employment.
In fact, both residential and nonresidential contracts
are up in the most recent period, and residential is up very sharply.
That's now beginning to spill through to some other sectors of the
economy. GE in Louisville has called back 1,000 employees because of
what they see going on in homebuilding.
As far as banking conditions go, if you compare the numbers
in the first quarter to the first quarter a year ago, it's really hard
to detect that there has been any change.
There's a very slight
deterioration in return on equity and in nonperforming loans, but it's
almost indistinguishable.
So, banking conditions in the District are
still very good. Despite that, and even though the banks are in a
position to lend, we're seeing very moderate credit growth, which I
think probably reflects a weakness in demand.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, I wanted to come here today also
and congratulate Mike by confirming that the recovery started in the
quarter in which he called it.
However, I was not able to get hold of
Mr. Smuckers to get my apple butter index and come down here and
report.
And that's unfortunate; that index is really reliable.
MR. TRUMAN.

Mike had two quarters!

-25-

7/2-3/91

MR. HOSKINS.
The District isn't showing anything much
different from what anybody else's District seems to be showing, at
least from what I've heard here. In the state of Ohio employment in
May is up one percent over what it was a year ago; in Pennsylvania it
All the anecdotal information
is down a percent and a half or so.
suggests that we've touched bottom and will be beginning to head up
soon. The employment numbers in Ohio would tend to indicate that.
The capital goods people are all nervous. The order books aren't
dropping or anything like that, but they don't see any sign of a
pickup in the third quarter, with the exception of large trucks; there
has been a pretty good surge in that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm sorry.

There's what?

A surge in the last couple of months in the
MR. HOSKINS.
order books for large trucks. The one thing I hear uniformly from
talking to people is their comfort with the inventory levels.
There
was not one person we talked to who thought they didn't have their
hands right around inventory; inventories were very low and right
where they wanted them. That's the only consistent [comment] I got
across the District in talking to manufacturing people.
In terms of the outlook for the national economy, again,
we're not too much different from the Greenbook. We just have
different monetary assumptions than they do.
I guess I'm a little
troubled by our concerns over all the risks that are out there. We
have to be cognizant of risk but I think everything we know about the
empiricism of macroeconomics, as well as macroeconomic theory in the
last 20 years or so, tells us that we probably can't control most of
those things very well.
And trying to offset them with monetary
policy is not going to help us a lot, whether it's unemployment caused
by defense changes or troubles in the real estate industry. So, it
seems to me that we ought to keep our eye on what we can control over
If we want to get long rates down and get some credibility,
time.
then we ought to take a tack that focuses on inflation. Now, if 4
percent money growth isn't going to get us there, then I think we
ought to go lower. Governor Angell is concerned that we haven't
gotten far enough; maybe that's because the relationship is disturbed.
The objective is not money growth; the objective is price stability.
So, I think that's where our focus ought to be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I'm a good deal more comfortable
than I was when we last met here in May. At that time we hoped that
we had a recovery at hand and now it's virtually certain it is at hand
and probably in hand. I find myself with a forecast for the remainder
of '91 that's on the high end of the [members'] range.
It's strong
inventory that does that.
But that having been said, I'm in the camp
for '92 of still having some considerable concerns. My forecast
produces what I consider to be a good [result]; it's a bit under those
of some people, but I'm concerned that the economy could well be
tender for a good while for several reasons. The first is the
fragility in the banking system; that has been brought up by several
I
people and I think everybody here is fully aware that it exists.
think that's going to be here and it presents continuing risks, as
John LaWare points out consistently.

7/2-3/91

-26-

The second thing that concerns me is the heavy load of debt
that has been built up over the '80s at all levels of the economy.
I

think that's going to be a drag for some time. In my view, we've
crossed the watershed between the basic orientation to create debt and
are changing over now to an era where it seems to me the orientation
is more to service debt and try to bring it down.
That's going to
take an extended period of time to accomplish and that's going to be a

certain underlying drag all the time that it's at work.
The third concern would be in the area of this inventory
cycle. As I understand it, it seems to be a substantially heavier
component of the overall recovery that we're looking for this time
around. And after a little while--a couple of quarters or maybe three
--that's going to run its course. Then there are going to have to be
some other sectors to pick up that slack when that ceases to be an
expansionary factor. And it's a little hard for me to see where that
slack is going to get picked up. Net exports don't look as if they're
going to be any help; real estate generally and commercial
construction in particular are going to be very weak for an ongoing
period; government certainly doesn't look as if it's going to provide
any stimulation--and I certainly hope it doesn't. There may well be
some help from consumers, but I have some question in my mind about
that. Some of these other things may turn out to be just a little
better. I'm well aware of Lee Hoskins' remark earlier today that
things always seem to be a little better than we estimate, and I hope
that that turns out to be the case here again. But I think we're in
for a tender period, at least through the next year. So, that leaves
me thinking that our policy challenges are, on the one hand, to do
what we can do to sustain the economy--not hype it up but sustain it-and to try to see that it has a chance to broaden as it goes along.
Clearly, at the same time, we have to get in hand and then maintain
and hold this much improved inflation outlook that I think we all see.
But for the time being this is a time to wait a while and see what
sorts of things begin to unfold over the next quarter or two.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Finally, Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Most of my stuff has been stolen by now by
other people! Some of my views are pretty consistent with Mike
Kelley's. It's very difficult to predict the turning point, and there
are plenty of moderating influences out there, which we have talked
about many times. Some are starting to come to a resolution. In the
state and local governments and pretty soon in most of these venues we
will see the shape of the resolution. The dollar continues to be
strong. The Greenbook now projects only a modest retreat and many
people have referred to Joan Lovett's list of the new recent flare-ups
on the financial fragility front. I would just mention, in reference
to Jerry Corrigan's comment that some of these recent episodes in the
examinations may raise again the specter of the credit crunch, that
there was an article today on the screen, and it may have been in The
Wall Street Journal, on the difficulty homebuilders are having getting
credit. The National Association of Homebuilders was saying that it's
going to be a terrible year. I might point out that their estimate
for housing starts is only a little higher than the Greenbook
estimate. So, actually, we're not being too optimistic, I think it's
fair to say. The Greenbook story has slimmed down and now it's mostly
inventories driving the process.
I think the cessation of inventory
liquidation should give us a healthy boost for a couple of quarters.

-27-

7/2-3/91

It's less clear to me how much accumulation we can project--whether
businesses will really want to replace the $80 billion they
liquidated.
Inventories have been a bit illusive, although it's good
to hear that people think they have them under control; we should get
some help there. After that, like Mike Kelley, I don't see a lot to
propel the economy. The Greenbook simply falls back to moderate
growth in consumer expenditures and acceleration in business-fixed
investment in '92, and I wouldn't have a great argument with that.
That should be enough to sustain the recovery. I do think there is
some risk that after the inventory effects wear off in the next
quarter or two we could return to the slow growth we had in '89 and
the first part of '90, leaving us vulnerable to shocks and recession.
There is the question of the adequacy of money growth to
sustain the recovery. For the last four years we have undershot the
midpoint of the target range. And I feel confident we're on that
track this year as well.
It's not clear to me in which direction the
I think the dollar has already gotten
next appropriate move will be.
a head start on the tightening, as Ted Truman alluded to--although
perhaps not quite in that way.
I do agree that we stand on the
threshold, potentially, of very substantial progress in reducing the
core inflation rate and it's a position that has taken this Committee
quite a few years to achieve. The potential progress seems to be
large by historical standards, so I think it is important that we do
what is necessary to try to put that in the bank.
I think we're in pretty good shape overall.
It is true that
the long bond may not be convinced; again, to say it relects concerns
about inflation raises questions of why the dollar has responded
I need more lessons in chart reading because the CRB
[differently].
index looks like it did fall off some, although gold is another issue.
And there may well have been an increase in the real rate due to the
But my view is that it will take more than
demands in eastern Europe.
just a couple of months of this to convince those taking a 30-year
risk. And if the inflation numbers behave as we've projected them as
the recovery progresses, I think they will want to see what happens
after it starts.
And I think the long bond will come around.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you, everybody.
I think we've run
pretty much to the end today. We will adjourn until 9:00 a.m.
tomorrow morning. Are we going to lock up here?
MR. BERNARD.

We usually do, yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
here may feel free to do so.

Anyone who wants to leave his materials

[Meeting recessed]

7/2-3/91

-28-

July 3, 1991--Morning Session
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Mr. Kohn.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Don?

MR. HOSKINS.
I sort of asked you all these questions
yesterday, Don, so let me try it differently this time.
The Bluebook
and the alternatives that you present for the Committee give us the
impression that we can shape the contours of output in the short run
without giving up disinflationary efforts.
What I want to know is:
What is your comfort level with these kinds of projections based on
the models that you use?
They're not forward-looking particularly,
and our experience with them leaves me uncomfortable.
MR. KOHN. Obviously, there's a wide band of error around any
of these projections. Mike would be the first to admit that.
MR. PRELL.

Or second!

[Laughter]

MR. KOHN. We're obviously giving you our best guess based
on experience, model results, etc.
We are coming at this from the
trough of a recession in which we do have some slack in resource
utilization, which gives us some encouragement that we can both reduce
that slack, keeping the unemployment rate above the natural rate of
unemployment, and get some progress on inflation. It is a middle
road.
It's a new version of a soft landing in some sense and perhaps
the ideal outcome. Obviously, there's a lot of room for slippage on
either side. And the issue for you, I guess, is whether you want to
aim at that or aim at something else.
The other piece of slippage, of
course, is between money and the objectives.
Not only is there
uncertainty about the underlying forces in the economy but there is a
lot of uncertainty about what money growth paths one would choose in
order to hit some agreed on set of objectives.
So, that compounds it.
MR. PRELL. President Hoskins, if Don hadn't just made that
remark, I think I would have myself. My sense is that we have as much
confidence in predicting what inflation will be over the next couple
of years looking at the real GNP and unemployment picture as we would
looking at money and guessing at velocity and the links through all
these channels to prices.
So, there is a significant uncertainty here
about what you should be focusing on to have the greatest confidence-MR. HOSKINS.
Let me just follow up. Would you make that
same statement if we were talking about money growth over a 5- or 10year period?
MR. PRELL.
MR. HOSKINS.

I might.
But you wouldn't be comfortable?

MR. PRELL. Obviously, this unemployment/inflation link is a
short-run relationship, so it may not be relevant over the longer
span.
But with financial innovation, I'm not sure what the meaning of
M2 will be five years from now. So, in today's world I'd be reluctant

7/2-3/91

-29-

to set out in advance a particular course and say "I want to stick to
that and I can be highly confident what the price trend would be."
MR. KOHN. If I may take the liberty of retranslating your
Our forecasts are based on a path for nominal interest
question:
rates and they relate that to spending and through that to output,
employment, and inflation; and another way of putting your question is
whether over 5 or 10 years I would have as much or a little more faith
in a money/nominal GNP relation than I would in a nominal interest
rate/GNP relation. I think as we practice policy we end up looking at
both of those and at a number of collateral pieces of information to
try to interpret the interest and exchange rates--with money being an
important piece of collateral information. But we'd be hard pressed
to put entire reliance on one or another set of these things.
MR. HOSKINS. I just had one other question, not on that
subject. At one point we widened the bands on M2 and the [other]
aggregates because we thought there was significant volatility. As I
look at the numbers over the last four years, we've been within a 1/2
point or so of the midpoint of the range on a fourth-quarter-overSo, it seems to me that maybe we don't have the
fourth-quarter basis.
I
same degree of uncertainty about where we're going to come out.
guess I'm asking you:
Would you be comfortable with a narrower range,
given our experience of the past?
I think the widening of
MR. KOHN. No, I guess I wouldn't.
the ranges reflected two things. One is the increased interest
elasticity of M2.
So, working as we do with interest rates and
nominal GNP, and feeding that back through M2, a mistake on the
interest rate/nominal GNP spending side means that the Committee would
tend to push interest rates higher or lower and, because M2 is more
interest sensitive now than it used to be over short periods of time,
we can get quite a substantial response in M2 to get the same nominal
GNP with the same inflation outcome in the short run, cyclically. The
other point would be that, if anything, I'm a little more uncertain
about the relationship of M2 to nominal GNP now than I was two or
three years ago when I thought we had a very good handle on it--at
least it looked like--over four [to] six quarters. Now I'm less sure.
So, the fact that we came out near the midpoint of the ranges the last
few years is almost a coincidence, involving offsetting surprises to
some extent.
I know, for example, that last year, 1990, we expected
money growth--and I think the Committee didn't disagree with this-near the upper part of the range by the end of the year. And it fell
way off. So, I think there's at least as much uncertainty about those
relationships now as there was when the Committee widened its ranges.
MR. PARRY. Don, a very key assumption in the alternatives is
what happens to the shift in the demand for money. Clearly, we had a
substantial shift in 1990 and we're making some assumptions about
further shifts.
If one were to see a return to more normal
relationships, then clearly we'd have a much different outcome with
regard to what the target ranges should be.
Is there some additional
information you could give us about the degree of confidence
associated with those particular assumptions?
MR. KOHN. I think I just expressed my uncertainty to
President Hoskins.
I'm not sure I could emphasize it any more. We
see that miss being related in part to the unusual developments in the

-30-

7/2-3/91

depository sector over the last year:
the shrinkage of the thrift
industry and the simultaneous problems of the banks and the effects
they are having on both depositors and depositories. Since we're
projecting an expansion in the economy and a slow abatement of the
credit crunch--and that these pressures on the depositories and the
thrift adjustment, while continuing, won't be accelerating anyhow-we're projecting that in growth rate terms M2 and GNP will come back
closer into their historical alignment over time.
But it is purely a
projection that comes out of this notion of the abatement of some of
these severe pressures with the economic expansion. But there is just
a huge amount of uncertainty about that.
It is the case that relative
to the models the errors in the first half of this year were a little
less than they were last year, and that by either extraordinary skill
or pure dumb luck we actually projected the model error at the
beginning of this year. The model error we got for the first half of
the year is pretty close to what we expected.
MR. PARRY.
I guess I'd make a comment.
Those alternative
strategies to me seem very useful, but in going to the alternatives
that you then show it's useful also to think that one could justify
perhaps following one strategy in the next year or so, given the
uncertainty associated with that period, and still go to perhaps an
even more aggressive strategy in subsequent years to achieve-MR. KOHN. We tried to hint at that in strategy IV, in which
we were sort of having fun fine-tuning this.
We said:
"Well, suppose
the Committee put a little more money in now. How fast would they
have to take it out so that at least they didn't get off the track of
strategy I?"
But, obviously, there are lots of permutations and
combinations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. My question is really along the same line. I'm
trying to understand the process in these alternative strategies a
little better than I do. Where does this 5-1/2 percent money growth
in the baseline, especially in the out years, come from?
MR. KOHN. We start with the presumption of a strategy for
policy involving slow deceleration of inflation, holding the
unemployment rate around 6 percent. We ask what nominal GNP and
interest rates would be consistent with that and the M2 fell out of
that. We did not set out to design a rule for money growth. You
couldn't hold-MR. STERN. You specify the economic characteristics and then
you back into the money path?
MR. KOHN. Exactly. And we recognize in the P* simulations-they are sort of footnotes here--the notion that you couldn't hold to
5-1/2 percent forever and get decelerating inflation.
It's too fast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Don, not to put too fine a point on it--and I
think you probably already answered the question--but on this key
issue of the relationship between the Ms and nominal GNP:
In footnote
5, where you say you assume further downward shifts, would it be fair

7/2-3/91

-31-

to say that that's a separate assumption and that you could just as
easily have less downward shift as more downward shift? That has some
implication for how much room we'd need if the downward shifts were
not [abating].
MR. KOHN.
It's our best guess and I agree with you that we
could have some more.
If you thought that the shrinkage of the
depository institutions system was just beginning, by asking for more
capital, closing all these thrifts, we would really be rerouting
credit away from these institutions.
The new banking bill will put
depositors, at least uninsured depositors, at risk if it passes and I
think accelerate that process.
If anything, one could easily make a
case for asking what they are going to do with all those M2 [funds].
They won't need them; they won't have any loans to make and we will
have greater downward shifts in the out years.
I think one could also
make a case, which is sort of embodied in the P* model, that we've had
a constant velocity since World War II on average. Actually one can
go back earlier, I guess--is that right, Mr. Chairman?--to World War I
and we've had constant M2 velocities since then. And what the staff
is assuming here is that V* is changing; that is in effect what we're
doing here. We have permanent velocity shifts, which is fighting an
awful lot of history.
So, I can make arguments, as I just did, on
both sides of that.
MR. PARRY. Well, one nice thing is that, given the
preliminary nature of these deliberations, we will have six months
more to observe what is happening to velocity relative to what one
would expect before [we set the final ranges in] February.
MR. KOHN. Well, in fact, the 5 percent growth for the year
1991--5-1/2 percent over the two quarters of the second half of the
year on average--really has very little further downward shift
relative to our standard demand model.
So, it will be interesting to
see whether that happens.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Don, on page 9 [in the Bluebook] on the baseline
you have real M2 growing from 1 percent in 1991 to 2, 2-1/4, 2-1/2,
and 2-3/4 percent [in the subsequent years through 1995].
Why does
real M2 grow--now, maybe real M2 is not something you think works--and
yet under alternative II, the tighter [scenario], you have real M2
growing on a much slower course, from 1 percent to 1-1/4, 1-3/4, 2-1/2
and then to 3-1/4 percent?
Why does real M2 behave so differently
under those two scenarios?
MR. KOHN.
2-1/2 percent.
MR. ANGELL.

Okay, I'm not sure I see the 3-1/4 percent;

I see

Well, in 1995 you have the price level at 1-1/4

percent.
MR. KOHN. Oh, I see.
I'm sorry; you're right.
I think the
point is that you tighten up a lot earlier in strategy II and then in
order to keep the unemployment rate from rising, at some point you
have to ease off a bit and push in a little real M2 or you're going to
have even faster increases in the unemployment rate out there.
The
other point is that with the slower growth--this probably accounts for

7/2-3/91

-32-

even more of it--and the lower inflation of strategy II, the tighter
strategy, nominal interest rates are moving down pretty substantially
by the end of the period, almost a percentage point below the
baseline. Baseline nominal interest rates also begin to move down in
'94 and '95 as inflation abates, to keep the real rates from rising
too much. They move down even faster in the slower money growth
strategy because inflation is coming off even more. As those nominal
rates move down, you get increased demands for money in the usual
velocity sense of lower velocity. And if you didn't push in more M2,
you wouldn't get the decline in nominal rates; things would explode in
a tightening way. So, you need more M2 in the out years in order to
satisfy demands for money compelled by lower interest rates.
MR. ANGELL.

Under both scenarios?

MR. KOHN. Right, but even more under the tight scenario in
the late years because inflation is coming down more and nominal
interest rates come down more. For nominal interest rates, although
they go up in the tight scenario right away and stay higher, the
In the
decline is a full 2 percentage points from '92 through '95.
baseline scenario, the decline is about 3/4 of a percentage point.
MR. ANGELL. But if that's the case--if you have real M2
under both alternative I and alternative II at 2-1/2 percent in 1994
and then in 1995 you have 3-1/4 percent [under alternative II]--I
would think the unemployment rate would fall more rapidly in 1995
under alternative II than it would under alternative I.
MR. KOHN. Well, the answer is in this interest rate effect-that is, the effect of money once you take account of the demands for
It isn't that much; the
money associated with lower interest rates.
growth doesn't accelerate that way under the tighter alternative; you
get some additional [growth], but not as much as [under the easier
one.]
MR. ANGELL. Okay, that's fine.
I don't think you're
disagreeing with what I'm saying:
that there would tend to be toward
the latter part of this period some possible gains from unemployment,
depending upon credibility. That might actually bring the
unemployment rate below alternative I.
That would
Below 6 percent?
MR. KOHN. Below alternative I?
be a lot of credibility! But it's moving in that direction.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. KOHN.

With the same inflation rate?
Anything is possible, Governor Angell.

If not,
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don?
I was looking over the data the last few days and
let me get started.
the more I look at the data--despite all the flowers that we are
getting and all the showering with praise that David Mullins has
gotten recently up on the Hill--policy has really been quite
That is, by whatever
successful, especially on the money supply side.
means, we have managed to bring money supply growth down in a
gradualist, successive, cumulative way to a point where we are now
And we have done it by bringing
back to growth rates of the 1950s.
down the targets slowly; actually, one time we left them unchanged,

7/2-3/91

-33-

but otherwise we continued to move them down in small increments. I
think we especially ought to be quite pleased that we've come through
a recession--hopefully, this is the end of it--without engendering
double-digit money supply growth. And that is an accomplishment that
I don't think is to be pushed aside very readily. When you look at
the data in the context of the P* model, which is as good a reducedform means of looking at money and inflation [as any], we still have a
way to go on the down side with respect to [controlling] inflation-that is, under the existing regime. I don't think we can hold the
last three months' figures, which are under 3 percent; but it may well
be that we will be surprised at what is actually in the process of
emerging at this stage because it's hard to make the case for anything
above a 3-1/2 percent inflation rate with these types of data. In
fact, assuming constant velocity, at the 4-1/2 percent midpoint or
slightly less, actual [M2] growth is consistent--or pretty close--to
price stability, if we believe that there is an upward drift [in the
Or I should say that the price [measures] do not
price measures].
fully capture the quality drift and, as a consequence, overestimate
the inflationary pressures.
I do think the credibility question that we're looking at has
to be a function of where both money and prices are. I cannot see how
anyone could claim that we have been expansionary with money, even
though we have not yet seen prices fall to the level that [is
commensurate with what the decline in money growth] suggests. It's
hard to know how to read the long-term bond rate, as to whether there
really are inflation expectations in there, or the behavior of the
exchange rates, which suggests that it's more real than we realize. I
don't think there's any question that the 5-1/2 percent M2 growth rate
that is implicit in the baseline model is too high over the long run.
That [rate of growth] is not consistent with the level of price
stability that the vast majority of us are looking at. And there's no
question that at some point within the next year or two we're going to
have to bring down our targets by a notch, maybe two. But we're not
all that close from where we want to be over the long run if we
believe that the long-term velocity [of M2] is stable. As a
consequence of that, I raise the question: If over the long run we're
going to be required to bring down the target rates, is this July 1991
meeting the time to do it for the year 1992? My answer to that at
this particular stage is "no."

We have a credit crunch; we have

fragility; we have all sorts of problems that have not worked their
way out. And I should think at this particular stage that we could do
very well by staying where we are. I fully recognize, and I agree
with Bob Parry on the point that the credit crunch may disappear. By
next February, the outlook may be significantly different; the
fragility may be behind us; and we'll have another shot at [the ranges
for] '92 in February. In fact, I had Don put together for me a list
of the times we've changed the July provisional targets in February,
and one way or another we've done that more than half the time.
So, I would argue at this particular stage, with fiscal
policy clearly shackled and likely to remain shackled for a while,
that the spotlight is on us in a way that I don't think we've seen for
a while. And I see, frankly, very little benefit to moving now on
lowering the targets, although I think it's essential that we not stop
here. I think we have made extraordinary progress in bringing
inflationary pressures down. We have gone through the recession
without blowing it. And with the current targets I think we have the

7/2-3/91

-34-

capability of continuing to cement a continued disinflationary
process.
I'm not sure there's anything to be gained in the short run
in signaling a tightening for '92 this far in advance.
I don't think
we need it.
All that will do is to galvanize some anti-Fed actions
which, since the banking bill is still open and under negotiation, can
create an inadvertent problem for us because amendments on the floor
of the House and the Senate can be particularly ill-informed and still
pass.
I should think at this particular stage that we probably would
be well advised to sit tight with '91 and '92, but plan to look at it
again in our next review of the '92 targets.
If things have improved
measurably and we have a shot at it, we probably should think strongly
about reducing the ranges a notch at that [time].
But if we wait a
year or if we wait a year and a half, I don't think that does us any
damage so long as money growth doesn't start to move outside the
target ranges and we are perceived to be willing to accept a lot more
in the way of monetary and credit growth than we have demonstrated
these last several years. Bob.
MR. PARRY. Well, Mr. Chairman, according to our projections
as well as those in the Bluebook, it is likely that M2 and M3 will end
up well within the range this year unless the outcome for economic
activity and inflation [differs markedly from our expectations].
Thus, maybe we should retain the ranges that we currently have for
this year.
For 1992, I can see compelling reasons in support of
either retaining this year's ranges or lowering at least M2's range by
1/2 percentage point.
In support of lowering the ranges, price
stability over time does require further reductions in the range of
M2, as you noted. Also, a reduction could send a clearer message to
financial markets concerning our goal for reducing the ranges and it
could have salutary effects on inflation expectations. On the other
hand, a reasonable outcome for the economy next year, including
further progress against inflation, seems to require an M2 growth
above the midpoint of this year's range. Moreover, there is
considerable uncertainty, as we've talked about this morning, about
the trend of velocity over the next 18 months.
It could return to
slower growth rates more quickly than is being assumed in our
forecast.
Finally, staying with the same range for M2 for two years
was agreed to in 1989 and also in 1990, without I believe sacrificing
the pursuit of price [stability].
I believe in view of the
preliminary nature of our July deliberations for 1992 I would favor
alternative II, which basically repeats the same ranges for next year
as we have for the current year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. As you know, Mr. Chairman, we've had a few
reporters around in recent months asking questions. One of the most
interesting questions I was asked--my answer was not reported as far
as I know--was:
What have you learned in five years?
And to that
there was a clear-cut, easy answer. I've learned that getting
inflation down is a lot harder than I thought it was five and a half
years ago.
It just is pretty hard to get it down. There have been
times that I've argued with the staff, with Mike, in regard to
inflation. I thought we were going to be more successful than we
were.
It's very clear to me now that it's not easy to get the rate of
inflation down.

7/2-3/91

-35-

The second point I would make, Mr. Chairman, is that you
pointed out to me a year and a half ago, when I was complaining about
inflation not coming down, that inflation would come down in a bunch
If you look at the history of
sometime, and I think you were right.
I had the view at one
disinflation, it does tend to come in bunches.
time that maybe inflation can come down during expansions, but our
success in getting inflation down during the latter part of an
So, we have an
expansion phase has proved not to be an event.
opportunity; and when you have opportunities, you act to make gains.
The third point I would make is that inflation never comes
But inflation
down too rapidly. Now, deflation could be too rapid.
doesn't come down too rapidly because when inflation comes down
rapidly the bond markets know it and you get some benefit from falling
So, gradualism sounds nice in theory, but it's just
interest rates.
So, at some point in
too easy if gradualism never begets progress.
time we have to stake out an opportunity, and I believe this is an
Now, Don, I know why it
unusual opportunity to make tremendous gains.
is that you have the 5-1/2 percent [assumption for M2 growth in 1992].
But it seems to me that by most measures we can look at the 4 percent
growth rate from Q4 to June and the 4 percent average over three years
--and it was very stable during the three years--and say that it
It would have been very adequate if the
really is quite adequate.
We would have found
rate of inflation had not bulged to 5 percent.
the 4 percent to be just fine if that rate of inflation hadn't bulged.
If M2 growing at 4 percent is sufficient to provide a recovery that
all of us are agreed is in place, then I see no reason why 4 percent
money growth won't work in the future.
I think you asked the question, Mr. Chairman: Why do it now
rather than in February? And I think the answer to that is that we
have a Chairman who is very, very good at persuading when he makes the
Humphrey-Hawkins report. And if the Chairman explains why it is that
we're [adopting] a lower target range, that can give us the
credibility kick that all of us think would be very, very helpful.
And in doing that I think we have a chance to have this recovery be
better rather than weaker. That credibility could cause the long bond
interest rate to fall from its [current] level, which is higher than
it was last year, and that would be very, very good for the recovery.
So, the reason that I would like to do it now is because we need the
bond market improvement now. That would give us a credibility that we
could not get in any other way. And, Mr. Chairman, even though you
would prefer not to explain that now, I think you'd be very good at
explaining it now. And I think that would make a considerable
If I'm wrong and the money relationship changes, I don't
difference.
see any reason why we couldn't back off in February. The tentative
step should be the step that we want to make and then if the money
relationship turns out to be quite different, you'd be able to explain
that next February.
[Explain] raising the targets in
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I appreciate your over-estimation [of my abilities]!
February?
President Black.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I've never disagreed with you
before, much to my pleasure, and I certainly agree with your comments
that the baseline growth rate for M2 is much too high and that
I even went so
strategy II is near what we ought to be aiming for.

-36-

7/2-3/91

far as to say one time to a reporter, facetiously, that much to my
dismay I was tempted to just give you my proxy and go play golf. And
you, on another occasion, said you were going to hold me to that! I
will try to cover my tracks by saying that I suppose at some point
inevitably we're all going to differ.
So, I'm with you on the first two-thirds but [not] when we
I recognize that long-run
get down to the discussion of the ranges.
alternative II, which means extending the '91 ranges to '92, could
encompass strategy II--an idea that we both endorse. But as the
Bluebook points out on the bottom of page 19, long-run alternative
III, which lowers all the ranges 1/2 percentage point is "more
consistent with the spirit and intent" of our anti-inflationary
strategy. And that would provide fresh evidence of our commitment to
the very things that Governor Angell has just described very well. I
think that is a very important point, as he emphasized. As I said
yesterday and as he said much better today, we are at a very crucial
point; we've had remarkable success up to this point and many
forecasters are now beginning to lower their projections of inflation
in part because they think the economy is not really going to spurt as
much as it has in past recoveries. But I think a large part of that
is due to the growing credibility that we have gained because we have
had this remarkable record over the last several years. I think
leaving these ranges unchanged in '92 would raise some doubts and
possibly slow, if not break, the momentum that we've gained thus far.
But lowering them would reinforce our credibility and I think would
reduce the transitional costs of achieving price stability.
I recognize that
Consequently, I very strongly favor alternative III.
M2 growth may well be in the upper part of that range next year if we
adopt that alternative, but that strikes me as a pretty manageable
problem that we could afford to take on in view of the benefits that I
think we would get from the credibility standpoint by lowering our
ranges. And if, as Governor Angell postulated, we had to raise them,
I share his confidence that you could explain that very well. We
really have a golden opportunity here that we haven't had until now,
and I think we have to seize it. Although there are many reasons why
I could argue that we ought to temporize, I'm afraid that I just have
to come out for alternative III.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Our goal is price stability. I agree with you
that we've made progress in terms of bringing money growth down. What
we know about money--or at least what we think we know--tells us that
we ought to get some progress. To date we haven't gotten the
progress. I'm not wedded to a particular money growth; I'm wedded to
price stability. And it seems to me that what we think we know about
it is that we're about a percentage point away from a noninflationary
economy in terms of money growth. And to look to raising the growth
rate in money--.
Even though I know it's a residual that falls out of
your output, price, and interest rate model, I view it as a policy
instrument. And I just can't see how we would want to tolerate a
5-1/2 percent rate of growth in money for any significant period of
time when we've worked so hard to get where we are. If the 4 percent
growth rate [over the past] four years doesn't get us anything, then I
think we ought to move on down to 2 percent or whatever it takes to
get us there in a reasonable time-frame. I just think that we
shouldn't be considering anything in the upper end of this target

7/2-3/91

range.
I would argue that we ought to lower the midpoint of this
target range and center it on 3 percent because that's where we want
to be.
And if that doesn't work, then we should center it lower. But
I don't think we ought to abandon our efforts to bring money growth
down when we seem so close. We can stay with the current targets for
the rest of this year but, for the reasons that both Bob Black and
Wayne Angell have already given, I think we would do ourselves a great
service by clarifying our commitment to price stability by lowering
the target ranges.
I'm not even comfortable with a 2 to 6 percent
range; I'd like one centered on 3 percent or at least I'd collapse the
top end of the range.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. BLACK.
and I showed!

Be patient, Lee; be patient.
Show the kind of restraint that Governor Angell

MR. HOSKINS. Well, I'll compromise and opt for a lower
target range of 2 to 6 percent. That's my recommendation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as I look back over our
experience of the past 12 to 18 months, I think that policy has been
about as good as we could have expected and certainly better than I
had anticipated. And for all of the reasons that you gave, I would
very strongly favor staying where we are.
In saying that, I'd like to
make it clear that I in no sense am abandoning the idea of price
stability, but I think we have to bear two things in mind. We're
trying to achieve price stability over time, not all of a sudden at a
cost to the economy. We have other responsibilities besides price
stability. Price stability may be the primary objective of a central
Our credibility, it seems
bank, but I don't think it's the only one.
to me, is measured not only in terms of how we deal with inflation but
also how we deal with the real economy. We have a recovery in train
But I do think the
at the moment; I think that's pretty evident.
You pointed to a number of other
risks are still on the down side.
So, I think it's
risks, none of which is trivial, I would say.
I think the risks
important that we hold where we are at the moment.
to us as an institution as well as to the economy are really quite
significant if we make a move at this time.
So, I would strongly
support your recommendation that we hold [the M2 range for] both '91
and '92 at 2-1/2 to 6-1/2 percent at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, the position that you have
presented to the Committee today and the conditions you described are
almost identical with the one's I espoused yesterday, so I'm very
It seems to me that
happy to support alternative II as the strategy.
there's room in that range to accommodate whatever we wish to do in
terms of continuing to put pressure on inflation. And I am very
concerned that at this point, when we don't have assurance of the
strength of the recovery that we think is underway, the announcement
effect of saying that we are going to slow down the growth in the
money supply could run the risk of aborting the recovery. So, I very
strongly support staying where we are, believing that we have enough
room within that range to do whatever we wish.

7/2-3/91

-38-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I think, as others have
said, that policy has been quite effective, largely by drift of
fortune as well as by skill.
And I think there is general agreement
that most of us often think about our objectives in terms of inflation
and [view achieving price stability] as a vehicle for promoting real
growth in the economy. A lot of the somewhat technical debate right
now comes down to the issue of how much we want to take into
consideration uncertainties associated with the relationship between
money and output. And it seems to me that, not unusually, we're in a
time of significant uncertainty. First of all, we're not absolutely
sure where we are in terms of the real economy itself. Beyond that,
there are all of these factors going on in the financial system to
which some people have alluded. And coming back to the question I
asked Don earlier, it's far from clear that we have a great deal of
In terms of
certainty about velocity's behavior in either direction.
credibility, a concern I have--I think we'd be surprised by it--is
that if we were to lower the ranges and then have to break through the
top of the range, that could be as damaging to credibility as some
other specs could be in the other direction. Additionally, I have a
great deal of sympathy for your view, Mr. Chairman; I'm not quite sure
what we get for changing [the ranges] now in July, halfway through the
year.
We'll have more information both on the real economy and on
So, I
what is happening in the financial system as the year goes on.
think the opportunity for gaining credibility is greater, if we find
it necessary to make a change, to do so after some of these things
So, for that reason, I support your
become less [uncertain].
suggestion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

I would prefer alternative II at this time as
MR. MULLINS.
well.
I think, as Governor LaWare says, it's unnecessary to change
the ranges.
The current [M2] range provides ample flexibility to
If we need 4 percent growth we have the
respond to inflation risks.
Indeed, we've experienced 4
ability to achieve it within this range.
percent growth over the last year and a half within the range. On the
credibility question, there is some merit to the credibility argument.
On the long bond, I'm not so convinced that there's much inflation
built in. When I see our long bond rate at roughly the same rate as
the German long bond, I wonder how much inflation premium is built
into our bond. Moreover, it seems to me that our credibility is not
threatened now. It has not been brought into question. And we might
be better off saving this and using it when it's needed more, although
I have some concern
I do think one could make an argument there.
about the appropriateness of the 2 to 6 percent range and the 4
percent midpoint, and I think that's something we should think about.
It may be right, but I'm not convinced that setting the midpoint at a
rate that is below realized core inflation for virtually every year
for the past 20 years is something we should do right now. If we
really think inflation is going to be 3 percent in '92, and if we're
going to have 4 percent growth in money, and velocity stays constant,
are we willing to say to the world--or to the people who will read it
this way--that we're willing to accept 1 percent real growth and
If we are willing to accept that, perhaps now is
rising unemployment?
not the time to announce it when the unemployment rate is still
rising, the recession is not yet cold in its grave and inflation is

7/2-3/91

-39-

already receding, and the banking bill has opened up our statutes to
meddling.

This process of reviewing it has been quite successful and

has been characterized by patience and persistence; and it's an
impressive achievement. We are approaching a stage when we ought to
think about where we're headed--toward a stable range and a more

stable target and what price stability really means, given that we
have the bias in estimation, as the Chairman mentioned and as we
discussed a bit yesterday. I think there's a question about the range
as well. It's not clear to me why Germany has a 4 to 8 percent range
and many of these other countries are able to operate within
relatively tight ranges. My view is that we're approaching a time in
which we ought to confront those issues. But I would prefer to
postpone that and talk about them perhaps with some background work by
the staff and in an environment with the recession behind us and the
recovery safely underway and when we know more about the shape and
form of the recovery and the nature of the progress that we're making
on reducing inflation. At that time the credibility of lowering the
range might be worth much more. So, I would agree with your proposal,
Mr. Chairman, the current ranges for '91 and tentatively for '92.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, it seems to me you phrased it very,
very well, and I absolutely agree with both the strategy and the
scenario as you outlined it.
It seems to me at this point that the
message effect of what we decide today is awfully important, perhaps a
bit more important than the practical operating effect. As I think
about it, I'm not sure I'd like the message effect of changing the
ranges either way at this point. To reduce the ranges has some
unfortunate consequences, which you talked about; it's the wrong time
to send that particular message. And, obviously, raising the range
would be inappropriate. I think the baseline alternative strategy as
Don has outlined it is reasonably consistent with the economic
forecast that we talked about yesterday. And I must say that as I
think about that forecast for this year and next year, it's a pretty
constructive outlook and, therefore, it seems to me that we ought to
continue to leave the ranges as we have them. I very strongly favor
the ranges of alternative II.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I strongly support alternative II
and I think that case has been made pretty thoroughly by others. But
I would like to go ahead and offer my summary of where my thinking
lies. There are two concerns that have been mentioned. Number one is
the actual operation of policy, which is of course the most important
thing. But signals are also important. As far as the actual
operation of policy goes, we always have a challenge on both sides.
The primary challenge, of course, is to maintain the downward trend of
inflation that we're all dedicated to, and that will be particularly
important if this recovery flourishes. But alternatively, we have to
be able to provide for a sustainable and broadening recovery if it
tends to falter after a bit. Under alternative II, we would provide
ourselves room to expand a bit if that turned out to be required and I
think the probability of that is non-trivial. And we would still have
plenty of room to apply more constraint if that were required. If, on
the other hand, we tighten the ranges now, we'd be pretty much
constraining our ability to respond if the economy did turn out to

7/2-3/91

-40-

falter after a time. As far as the signal effect goes, we clearly
have tightened slowly for as much as a decade now and within the
framework of today's economy I think it's fair to say that we continue
to do that. And I believe that we're perceived as doing that.
I
think the market perceives us as dedicated to lowering inflation, but
it also sees us as trying to be realistic about the state and the
needs of the real economy.
It also sees us as a bit frustrated as far
as our inability so far to make visible progress on inflation.
So, in
those contexts, I really question the need for an aggressive signal at
this point.
I would even suggest that an aggressive signal might
frighten the market in a way that would be counterproductive, if they
come to see the Federal Reserve as tending to over-react to its
frustration of not getting faster inflation progress.
So, signal-wise
a perception of an increased level of aggressiveness at this point may
be (a) unnecessary, and (b) possibly a little counterproductive. As
far as the actual conduct of policy goes, I think the present ranges
give us plenty of room to provide more constraint if that's what time
shows to be necessary and still provide us some head-room if trouble
arises and we need to have some head-room.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Mr. Chairman, I favor alternative III essentially
One has been discussed at some length and has to do
for two reasons.
with credibility.
I'm not sure that a 1/2 point move in the range
gets us a lot of additional credibility. In fact, in this environment
On the
and given our stated objectives, it might be kind of expected.
other hand, anything we can do to enhance credibility is important
because there are costs involved in bringing inflation down; and to
the extent that we can get credibility working for us and contain
those costs, I think that's an advantage. My judgment is that a
reduction in the range at this point would help us at least a bit on
that score.
The second reason I'm in favor of lowering the ranges at
this point is continuity. This has been commented on as well. The
fact is that M2 over the past 4+ years has grown at 4 to 4-1/2 percent
or so.
It just seems to me that we shouldn't compromise that kind of
performance. I think continuity is important here, and we ought to
act in that fashion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, long-range target setting is a mix of
substance and symbolism. Given where we are as the only game in town
and hopefully at the bottom of the business cycle with inflation
coming down, I think the symbolism part is more important than the
substance.
It is important that we have credibility on the inflation
side in terms of reducing it, but I think it's also important to have
credibility in the sense that the central bank ought to be viewed as
pro recovery and pro healing of the financial system. And I think
keeping the ranges the same in this context is the right balance. I
think it gives us the overall kind of credibility that we need in
order to be an effective policymaker. On the more substantive side,
the technical side, all of the options that we're talking about have
us in the top end of the existing range.
I think we need that
maneuverability and the operating room, given the uncertainties about
what kind of recovery we're going to have. We've talked a lot about
velocity.
It may turn out to be the way the staff says; it may not
turn out to be the way the staff says.
So, when I look both at

7/2-3/91

-41-

symbolism and substance, I come out fairly clearly on the side of
keeping the ranges the same.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.
I think perhaps everything has been said and
there's nothing more new, particularly with respect to my view that
That is, we've come to mid-July
your proposal is the correct one.
when you will testify and there are still such uncertainties about
this recovery that to suggest that we can say the recovery is well
underway and we can look forward 18 months ahead and say we're going
to bring money growth down seems to me to be the wrong signal to be
giving at this time. That does not say, however, that if I were here
in February that I would not be going to the 2 to 6 percent range,
because I think it is over the long run the appropriate way to go-providing we do have the recovery that has been projected by the staff
in the Greenbook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. For 1991, I think everyone is in agreement that
For 1992, it's a fairly close
we ought to stay with the same ranges.
decision, but the emphasis is that the ranges are tentative for 1992
I agree with Governor Angell
and will be reviewed in seven months.
that one can make the case, based on what we expect to happen between
now and then and based on conditions that we expect to prevail in
1992, that our tentative judgment right now is that it will be
appropriate to reduce those ranges by 1/2 of 1 percent, centering on 4
percent.
I would recommend that we do that and explain it in a way
that emphasizes that should developments not occur as we expect, it
could always be reversed.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I would reaffirm the '91 ranges and
put in alternative II for '92. But I do take quite seriously this
point you made, Mr. Chairman, about the need to take a hard look at
I say that because, assuming there are
those '92 ranges in February.
no big surprises in the economy or financial system that would make me
take away Mike Prell's gold star that I gave him yesterday, we are at
the point in the cycle where we have to think about, or begin to think
about, the need to tighten policy. Certainly, I'm not saying that's
needed right now, but we should start thinking in those terms. And it
seems to me that on this whole question of credibility, which probably
gets a little overblown, the real test of our credibility is going to
be whether, if it's needed, we will tighten soon enough and
sufficiently enough to prevent the serious mistakes in policy that
were made in the mid-1970s.
If you look at the forecast and take it
more or less at face value, it seems to me that that question could
Since I
easily be on the table in spades six months from now or so.
see that as a possibility, and since I think our credibility really
does come down to what we do and not what we say, I'd rather keep the
ranges where they are just in case things do work that way. And then
a cut in the ranges in February will be more than symbolic and the
timing might be precisely what we need. So, I'm quite comfortable
with reaffirming the ranges in alternative II but, as I said, I do
take seriously your point about the need to look at that closely in
February. Indeed, things could turn out such that both substantively

-42-

7/2-3/91

and symbolically a cut in the ranges then could be just what the
doctor ordered when we need it most.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. In terms of the strategies laid out, I'd favor
strategy II, the tighter one, and flowing from that alternative III in
terms of the ranges. We're talking about a long-term approach to
strategy here, and that underlines our commitment to price stability,
which I think is the one thing we really can influence in the long
run. The credibility point is the major argument in favor of it.
It
seems to me that we could get the most positive impact by making a
move now. I agree with Jerry:
Our actions are more important than
the symbolism of this. But I think if we change it in February, it's
going to be because we're perceived to be on the run; and I don't know
whether we buy a lot at that point in time.
Some of the arguments
that I've heard I'm not particularly persuaded by--for example,
gradualism. We've been at this for four years and I think we ought to
keep down that path.
I agree with what you said, Mr. Chairman, and
with what Lee said:
There's some distance to go here. And I think
this is the time to try to consolidate some of the gains.
In terms of
this issue about a top end of 6 percent somehow constraining our
ability to act if the economy is weaker than we expected--and this
picks up on Jerry's point--we're already "acting" quite a bit now; we
have projections in the Bluebook of M2 growth moving up to a 6 percent
rate, which is 50 percent higher than what we've averaged over the
last four years.
So, we're doing our part in trying to assure a
recovery.
In fact, I would agree with Jerry that what we have to be
thinking about is:
When do we take some of that rope back in?
On the
final point that I've heard some arguments that I don't necessarily
agree with, I'd add the financial fragility point.
I don't think the
conduct of monetary policy, so long as we're providing adequate
liquidity to the economy, is really the appropriate tool.
I think we
can look ourselves in the mirror and say that we've been doing our
part on that score.
I don't disagree that there are problems out
there, but I think there are other policy approaches that need to
address those. If you step back and look at them, the problems that
we're having with the financial system are really the products of a
monetary policy that sowed the seeds for inflation, and a lot of the
problems are inherent now as inflation is coming down.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. We have to take two votes at this
stage. One is on 1991.
I inferred from the comments that there was a
consensus for maintaining the 1991 ranges currently in place.
MR. ANGELL.

I move that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLACK.

Is there a second?

I'll second that, Mr. Chairman.

In
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, could I interrupt just a second?
the Bluebook we raised the issue of whether the Committee wished to
delete the words "a resumption of sustainable growth" in the first
sentence. We put that in when the economy was in recession.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think it's appropriate to delete that.

7/2-3/91

MR. ANGELL.

I would agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that phrase?
MR. PARRY.
[directive] now?
MR. KOHN.

Does anyone object to the deletion of

Are we talking about the language of the

Yes, the long-run part of the directive.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Page 26.

MR. PARRY.
I was wondering what contribution this phrase
"contribute to an improved pattern of international transactions"
I think we took some of
made.
That seems to me a bit of fluff maybe.
that out of the shorter-term language in the operational paragraph.
The recommendation
It seems to me that we could excise that as well.
that Don made was to take out "a resumption of" and I suggest that we
take out what follows--that is, "and contribute to an improved pattern
of international transactions"--because I don't know what it means.
It seems to me that it would be better if we said "will foster price
stability and promote sustainable growth in output."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
provide it!
[Laughter]

You know what

it means but you can't

MR. TRUMAN.
This phrase, if my memory is correct, has been
in the directive since about the middle of the 1970s.
And it was-MR. PARRY.

That's even more reason!

There have
Well, I'm not so sure about that.
MR. TRUMAN.
been several rounds in which we tried either to define it or to refine
My memory of listening to the Committee on
it to a greater degree.
this point is that they always ended up saying it's a way of
suggesting that international dimensions of policy are not completely
If you want to look for
irrelevant to the Committee's deliberations.
substance, that's what it is.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Bob, would you rephrase your

revision?

MR. PARRY.
Yes.
"The Federal Open Market Committee seeks
monetary and financial conditions that will foster price stability and
promote sustainable growth in output."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It strikes me as eminently sensible at
this particular time because I had the same problem when I reread it.
Does anybody have any objections?
MR. ANGELL.

I agree.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay, let's

assume that the bracketed

phrase "a resumption of" gets deleted and that the sentence ends with
a period after the word "output." Would the Secretary call the roll?
MR. BERNARD. This is for reaffirming the '91 ranges with the
new wording in the leadoff paragraph:

7/2-3/91

-44-

Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
President Parry

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. For 1992, as I recorded the consensus,
I infer that that referred not only
it comes out as alternative II.
to M2 but in general to M3 and the debt aggregate. Would somebody
like to move that?
SPEAKER(?).

I'll move it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

"For 1992 the Committee agreed
It would read:
MR. BERNARD.
on tentative ranges for monetary growth, measured from the fourth
quarter of 1991 to the fourth quarter of 1992, of 2-1/2 to 6-1/2
The Committee provisionally
percent for M2 and 1 to 5 percent for M3.
set the associated monitoring range for growth of total domestic
nonfinancial debt at 4-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. With regard to M3, the
Committee anticipated that the ongoing restructuring of thrift
depository institutions would continue to depress the growth of this
aggregate relative to spending and total credit. The behavior of the
monetary aggregates will continue to be evaluated in the light of
progress toward price level stability, movements in their velocities,
and developments in the economy and financial markets."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
President Parry
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.
policy and I'll call on Don Kohn.

Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
We now move to current monetary

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
this time.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I will be much briefer

Questions for Don?

7/2-3/91

-45-

MR. ANGELL. Don, if we look to the period ahead and, as Vice
Chairman Corrigan indicated, we find it necessary to engage in a
tightening, are there any explorations underway that will enable us to
administer the open market window in such a way that we would not have
It just seems to
every 1/4 point seen as an announcement arrangement?
me that it has always been very helpful when we had some reserve
targeting arrangement that did not give an announcement effect to the
fed funds rate. What can you tell me in regard to explorations of
ways to administer the window which would enable restraint to take
place and would cause interest rates to be seen as rising by market
pressures rather than as an announcement of the Fed?
MR. KOHN. As you know, Governor Angell, we explored such
possibilities a little while ago, partly at your urging. I think
there is nothing actively underway now. If the Committee wished,
obviously, we could do something. I think the key question the
Committee would need to ask is whether you're going to have reserve
targeting and have it tied in some way to M2; this would be a stretch,
given the pattern of reserves, as Harvey Rosenblum pointed out [to me]
yesterday, but you could do it. We played in the past with "shadow"
reserve targets but not tied to M2. The premise there would be that
movements in M2 would provoke some reaction. The Committee would have
to have enough confidence in its reading of M2 that it would want
money markets to be moved around by deviations of M2 of some size--the
Committee could decide [what those should be]--from its projection.
The underlying confidence needed is in the relationship of money to
the outcome.
MR. ANGELL. Well, would having the discount rate above the
fed funds rate and having some other supporting overnight arrangement
below that tend to give an atmosphere in which you could do this
without having the fed funds rate run too far?
MR. KOHN. Well, I think your plan would limit the movements
in the funds rate, depending on where the penalty discount rate was in
terms of a ceiling and where something else was in terms of the floor.
But if you wanted a substantial band in there, then you would have to
tolerate increased federal funds volatility within that band; that
would go along with this. So, it would help in some sense. I don't
think it would negate the need to make the fundamental decision about
whether you wanted to tie federal funds rate movements even within a
band to relatively short-run movements in M2. Now, if the Committee
so desires, we can certainly work to see how we could do something
along the lines of tying reserves to the funds rate and M2. But I
think there are some decisions that need to be made by the Committee
if we're going to go ahead with it.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, the reason I ask this question is
that this will be the first time that we might be in a tightening
arrangement in which the market will misread every 25 basis points in
the fed funds rate as having an announcement effect. And I think
that's a frightening disadvantage for us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I agree with that.
If we can find a way
to avoid that in time, I think it would help policy.
MR. BLACK. I would strongly support that suggestion. I've
been urging my colleagues in Richmond to do just that, but they have

7/2-3/91

-46-

And it
been resisting because they don't really think it can be done.
is difficult, unless we're saying that the reserveable part of M2 is
going to grow at the same rate as the nonreserveable part.
If we paid
interest on reserve balances, it would make that more likely.
But
having to reach up in the air and pick some federal funds rate that's
going to give some predictable rate of growth in the money supply is
just a crap shoot at best.
I'd really like to move toward some kind
of reserve targeting if it can be done. But it might necessitate a
complete change in the reserve requirement regime to do it
successfully.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why don't you give it some thought, Don?
Well, we've been thinking about this continuously now for quite a
while.
The question is:
Are we at a point where there's any payoff
in committing Committee resources to start to be somewhat more
detailed?
It's more a question and not so much an issue of whether we
should do it because, obviously, if it looks as though it's going to
work, it's something very valuable for us to have. The question is
more an operational issue as to whether or not enough is out there to
suggest that the commitment of research resources will come up with
something other than "on the one hand and on the other hand."
[Laughter]
MR. KOHN. We will commit to bringing a memo to the FOMC by
August, at least outlining the issues and the sorts of decisions that
we think will need to be made. I would invite the research directors
around the edge of the room to supply me or my colleagues with any of
the work that you have already done on this, please.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Don, what would be your interpretation of the
meaning of M2 if it continued into July-August at the subdued rate of
growth that we've seen in the last months?
MR. KOHN.
I don't know; it would worry me. And I would have
to be honest with the Committee and say that the numbers handed to me
this morning suggested weaker M2 than we built into the Bluebook for
This wouldn't
the latter part of June in terms of preliminary data.
necessarily affect the July growth rate, but we'd probably be marking
June M2 down by close to a percentage point relative to the Bluebook,
based on the data for the last two weeks. As I tried to say in the
briefing, one way of approaching it is to say:
Well, everything is
going fine; the economy is recovering; all the incoming data on the
business cycle etc., seem very consistent, and we assume they will
continue that way over the next few months, consistent with the
outlook of the staff or of the Committee for a recovering second half
of the year.
I might also say that something odd is going on with
peoples' portfolios, so just ignore it; it's a demand shift
[unintelligible] missing money [unintelligible].
I guess I would have
trouble if it persisted, particularly through August, and growth was
edging down toward the lower part of the range.
I would have trouble
making a judgment to dismiss it out of hand. If people are moving out
In the past when
of M2, they're finding other assets more attractive.
the Committee has eased or tightened, for example, the first effect on
M2 is just a portfolio shift. You raise or lower the rates on other
kinds of instruments; people shift their M2 portfolios and later
change their spending.
If we're seeing a situation in which interest

-47-

7/2-3/91

rates in bond markets, for example, are so high that they're
attracting a flood of savings, it may be that those interest rates are
so high that they're not going to support the kind of expansion [we
envision].
If we're seeing a situation in which depositories simply
don't want the retail deposits or depositors are still so scared and
uncertain about what is happening at depositories that they don't want
to give [funds] to them, the re-channeling of that credit may not be
So, I would hesitate to say that if it continued
entirely effortless.
weak like this, I would definitely ease policy. But it would
certainly make me think hard about where we were going three, six
months from now and whether we really did have a satisfactory policy
in place.
It would be an extraordinary miss in the predictive power
of M2, which isn't very great. There's a wide band around our
expectations but it seems to me that when you get to one or another
edge of the band you're probably getting a signal that you shouldn't
It would weigh
ignore it unless it is overwhelmed by other signals.
on that side in my mind.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Other questions for Don?

MR. MELZER. Where is that weakness in M2?
board or in the non-M1 components?

Is it across the

I started talking
MR. KOHN.
It's in the non-M1 components.
about the revisions that I just got handed me this morning.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Is that more than yesterday?

MR. KOHN. Slightly, I think. I can't remember exactly what
Small time deposits,
it looked like yesterday. But it's widespread.
which had been consistently weakening, have continued to weaken; there
are big minuses there. But the interesting thing in this is that the
MMDAs have weakened as well.
MR. MELZER.
MR. KOHN.

Is M1 still growing?
Yes, in fact Ml, if anything, was revised slightly

upward.
MR. MELZER. Wouldn't that give you some comfort in
connection with your response that-MR. KOHN. Yes, particularly since the strength is in other
checkable deposits. We will be publishing a drop in M1 on Friday, but
the preliminary data for the latest week suggest that that comes back,
with a $2 billion increase on July 1.
MR. BLACK. Don, is there anything that suggests--other than
what your material contains--that the small time and savings deposits
might be moving into bond and stock funds?
MR. KOHN. We have actual data on the bond and stock funds
through May, which show very large increases. We've talked to the
managers of those funds and they say that it's not less for the stock
but more for the bond funds and that those inflows have persisted in
June.
So, I think there is some of that there.

7/2-3/91

-48-

MR. BLACK. Would I be justified in being less concerned
about the weakness in June because of where this money has gone?
MR. KOHN. Well, I don't know. I think that's an analytical
Whenever M2 is weak, it can be weak for one of two reasons:
issue.
I do think
Income is weak or people are reallocating their portfolio.
it's not giving us a signal that the economy was somehow collapsing in
June.
Of that I'm quite confident. But as to whether the portfolio
reallocations can be entirely ignored, I'm less confident.
MR. BLACK. I come out, I think, about where you do.
It
gives me some comfort knowing where they've gone; otherwise I'd be
concerned that M2 has been too weak.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don? Why don't
It's really interesting in a sense
I start, then, on the discussion.
that we are getting so many positive signs that the economy is
In
strengthening. We're picking it up pretty much across the board.
fact, with the exception of a somewhat disappointing new-home sales
figure that came out this morning, I don't recall a figure that was
under expectations in the last three or four weeks, which is really an
extraordinary run on specific data. Very specifically, I think the
progress that we had been discussing at the last meeting relative to
how we foresaw inventory liquidation moving into increased orders and
eventually increased production is pretty much on schedule and, if
anything, is ahead of schedule. The order patterns are weak in
There is still evidence that in June, even
increasingly fewer areas.
though it looks as though industrial production is clearly up for
June, inventory liquidation was still going on. And when you look at
all of the other elements of final demand, there's not much to see;
it's not terrific, but it's clearly not caving. The crucial issue
that concerned me--namely, the problem of capital goods weakness-There
seems to be fading. The order patterns are somewhat better.
seems to be at least now a mixed pattern in nonresidential building
contract awards and permits, whereas before it was a free fall.
So, all of the data are coming together, with the exception
of the financial balance sheet structure. The weekly data that we're
They suggest that inventory
turning out on bank loans look awful.
liquidation is being financed out of declining bank loans. Bank
credit, as Don has said, is pretty sluggish; we are getting a modest
increase in residential real estate loans and a presumed continued
Since the individuals who are
decline in commercial mortgages.
putting the orders in and obtaining the production materials are the
same or at least in proxy form are those who are making the financial
decisions, it's obvious that purchases of materials are getting
Why is it
financed.
So, the question we have to ask ourselves is:
that the flow-of-funds or the balance sheet structure don't seem to
reflect the financing in physical volume? There are a number of
potential answers to this. The first is that it's clear that this is
This is actually what happened; it is merely looking
not a forecast.
Orders are moving up, production is moving up,
at the recent past.
So,
and sales are moving up, and the balance sheets show nothing.
I've been
whatever is happening, ex post it is being financed.
meaning to look at one thing and haven't had a chance to look at it
closely; I have a suspicion that part of the answer is that an
increasing part of the nominal GNP reflects non-asset accumulation
Electric power purchases, for example, in the GNP have no
categories.

7/2-3/91

-49-

balance-sheet effect. Purchases of residential structures do;
inventories do and involve varying degrees as you go up and down the
detail of the GNP, even though you can get a very big chunk of
services with no balance sheet effect. And that clearly has an impact
on how the system is financed. I suspect that is the case. I also
suspect that the grossing effect in the flow-of-funds has probably
come down, meaning the type of big grossing that we used to see in the
state and local government sector, which borrowed to reinvest, or the
very big element of borrowing on existing homes.
One of the interesting charts that Mike had yesterday was the
one that showed net equities as a percent of GNP and net borrowings as
a percent of GNP. In the last several quarters they were tending to
converge, implying, if you just put them together, that the totalfunds-raised ratio to GNP wasn't all that much out of line. But there
is no question at this stage that we are getting a credit deflation.
That is, not only are the monetary aggregates growing more slowly but
all of the intermediary expansion is softening. And part of this is
clearly offset by significant increases in direct borrowing in the
bond markets and increased equity issuance. So, that curve that we
used to look at about the proportion of financial intermediation on
the one hand and commercial bank intermediation on the other as a
percent of the GNP has been going down for quite a long time and still
seems to be doing that. And it may well be that what we've got here
is sort of a secular shift out of intermediating institutions; part of
that may be that people are just scared of banks and thrifts and are
trying to keep their money out. It doesn't require very much change
to affect the net change figures and to give us peculiarities, which
may well explain the money supply problem that Don is raising. I
don't know what to make of it. I would say that the bottom line
suggests to me that it's not a policy question at the moment.
Things seem to be pretty much on track and I don't think
there's any real alternative to alternative B. There are [areas of
uncertainty] that are more likely to affect Federal Reserve action
later rather than [sooner].
And I think we have problems in both
directions. Jerry raises the concern, which I think may well be the
more appropriate concern, that problems are going to be coming at us
in the direction that will require us to tighten, not ease. But there
is the possibility that we may be looking at a financial system that
is disintermediating and we're going to have to make a decision as to
whether or not that has any significance for the economic output or
the economy. But at the moment it doesn't strike me as an immediate
issue that confronts us; I suspect it's one that may emerge sometime
later in the year.
So, for now I would recommend no change,
alternative B. Bob Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL.
I would agree completely, Mr. Chairman,
alternative B.
I assume you're talking about a symmetric directive?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes,

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I didn't say but obviously I-That's really symmetric when you

don't even have to say it!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

7/2-3/91

-50-

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with your
recommendation of alternative B--that we stay with existing policy.
However, based on the performance of the economy in the early stages
of past recoveries, I really wouldn't be very surprised to see new
information coming in that will indicate that perhaps the recovery is
a bit more robust than we're currently anticipating. If that were the
case, then I think promptly reacting to such information probably
would have beneficial effects on long-term financial markets and,
moreover, probably could avoid the need for a more vigorous policy
action in the future. Therefore, I would prefer an asymmetrical
policy directive to reflect the possible need to tighten over the
intermeeting period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. LAWARE.

Governor LaWare.

I support the proposal of "B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
I support "B" symmetric, although I understand
what President Parry is concerned about. And I would emphasize that I
think it's very, very important that we not be seen at all to be
getting behind the curve. That is, if the market believes we're
falling behind the curve in that kind of circumstance, it would be
very, very unfortunate; I think the long-term bond rates would show
that and when we tighten I think long-term interest rates would go in
the wrong direction. But there isn't anything right now that suggests
that that needs to be done.
It seems to me that the money growth
ought to be discounted; that is, we ought not to be thinking we're as
tight as maybe we think we are looking at money growth. But looking
at commodity prices and other things, I don't think there's any need
to tighten at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

Mr. MELZER. I favor "B" symmetric.
I'm just reflecting on
something you said, Alan, and on Don's comments before.
I'm wondering
whether we ought to be worried about weak M2 growth in the other
direction.
In other words, it may actually give us a false sense of
comfort that we have a restrictive policy in place.
I had our people
look at what reserves are doing every two weeks when they're released.
And if you just look back over the last year, total reserves--this
isn't the St. Louis number this is the Board number--have grown 5.2
percent over the last year; since the end of the year they've grown
7.1 percent; since the end of the first quarter they've grown 8-1/2
percent.
But over the last two months, it's 16.4 percent.
So, if you
look at that, it's hard to argue that monetary policy is not providing
adequate liquidity to the economy. We've talked about it before in
terms of the problem with the operating regime, but if market rates
start to move up with a strengthening economy and we peg the funds
rate too low, this is the result.
I guess I'm a little worried, just
listening to the comments that we have portfolio shifts in M2 but that
the Ml component of M2 is growing very healthily, that we may be
misled by a weak M2 number.
I would not advocate any tightening now;
I wouldn't even advocate an asymmetrical directive. But I think we
have to be very attentive to this.

7/2-3/91

-51-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's an important point. I think
that's the reason why Wayne's view about trying to get off the funds
rate is really an important issue. President Syron.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I support what you suggest, "B"
symmetric. I do think that the point that has been made--that it may
be necessary for us to be willing to react quickly, if things do come
back strongly on the real side--needs to be emphasized again. Also, I
think what Governor Angell said is very, very true. But it's less
clear to me how we resolve that in the short run. So, all of this
argues in my mind for just staying where we are right now.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. I agree with "B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman. I
would like to suggest that we consider moving the "monetary
aggregates" phrase up to either first or second place, though. I'm a
little concerned by the weakness we've had, but I think there's a good
explanation for it. So, I think Governor Angell is right; we have not
been too tight. But at some point the aggregates may give us a little
more accurate information and I'd like to pay more attention to them.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I suggest something? Actually, if
we had more time, Governor Kelley was going to make the presentation
on this whole question. If you wouldn't mind, I'd just as soon wait
until the next meeting when we can discuss this in considerably more
detail. I think you ought to be prepared at that time to re-raise the
issue because--

MR. BLACK.

That's fine.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That whole section [of the operational
paragraph] does require us to take a look at it and I think it would
be useful then to make some decisions. President Keehn.
MR. KEEHN. For the interim period it seems to me that the
current policy is appropriate. There is a fairly short interval
between now and the next meeting and, therefore, I'd be very
supportive of alternative "B" with symmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

"B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

Governor Kelley.

Governor Mullins.

I support "B" symmetric

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I, too, support "B" symmetric. I don't see any
case here for changing anything. I do have a little concern that
things have worked out exceptionally neatly this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You don't trust it!

MR. STERN. I don't trust it.
But unless we get some major
data revision or something, I guess we ought to just--

7/2-3/91

-52-

SPEAKER(?).
MR. STERN.

Enjoy it.
Enjoy it,

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

right.
Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. "B" symmetric.
Let me just come
back to this point that Ed Boehne raised first and others have
commented on.
In the period immediately ahead, partly for the reasons
Tommy Melzer noted, I would worry more about slower real money supply
growth than I would about fast money supply growth. Part of what this
dilemma about the money supply is telling me at least right now is
that the money supply really isn't worth a damn either in terms of a
policy indicator in the short run.
Wayne wants to get off the funds
rate and so do I; but if you're going to get off that, you have to get
on something else. And it isn't clear to me what else we can get on.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what Don Kohn keeps telling us.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But this point you're raising, this
intermediation phenomenon, really could make the policy process in the
period ahead very, very tricky no matter what horse we're riding.
It
is a worry.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think it's so dramatic that a lot of
our old guidelines have to be rethought.
President McTeer.
MR. MCTEER.

"B" symmetric, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS.
With our hard peg on the funds rate, as
everybody has said, money is the residual; and we don't much know what
that residual is telling us.
If you want a suggestion for what we
ought to be targeting, it's probably the CPI. And if it moves up, we
ought to raise rates.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. HOSKINS.

Commodity prices?
"B" symmetric!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. GUFFEY.

President Guffey.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

[Laughter]

I guess that leaves President Boehne.

"B" symmetric.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have a consensus for "B" symmetric
and I would like to have the language read with the appropriate
[wording].
MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions. Depending upon progress toward
price stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of the
monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domestic

7/2-3/91

financial markets, somewhat greater reserve restraint or somewhat
lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in the intermeeting
period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be
consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period from June through
September at annual rates of about 5-1/2 and 3 percent, respectively."
Would somebody like to move that?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

I'll move it.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Call the roll.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
President Parry

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The FOMC meeting will adjourn after I
indicate that the next meeting is Tuesday, August the 20th.
END OF MEETING

