Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
April 30,

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

1991

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Parry

Messrs. Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman,
Simpson, and Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Section Chief, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Doying, Assistant to the Secretary, Office of
the Secretary, Board of Governors
Ms. Munnell, Senior Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston

Transcript of Telephone Conference Call of
April 30, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Gentlemen, the Board has just voted to
lower the discount rate by 1/2 percentage point and the Desk will
reduce the federal funds rate by only half of it, bringing the funds
rate down 25 basis points. The reason for this is essentially a
reflection of the views that we spelled out at the last FOMC meeting
when, as you may recall, the position that I at least was taking on
the symmetrical directive was that we were looking for emerging
evidence of the turn in the economy.
In particular, we expected
housing and autos to move and capital goods to hold stable. The
evidence at this stage is that the housing markets are clearly turning
albeit not at a pronounced rate; nonetheless, they are moving. Auto
sales and consumer expenditures are still down, although I still think
the odds are that they will pick up. The capital goods markets,
however, increasingly are evidencing weakness.
I disregard some, but
not all, of the anecdotal evidence I keep getting from a lot of my
friends in the industrial area; orders in the capital goods and
materials areas, as they convey it to me, show no sign of a turn and
indeed in many instances are weakening. The last aggregate data that
we have on durable goods orders, for example, are quite weak. And the
accelerating decline in contracts and permits for nonresidential
building strikes me as underscoring the issue of potential emerging
weakness in capital goods.
In any event, what we are observing is a
pattern of incoming data that is running under our forecast and one
that suggests that downward revisions will be required.
In my
judgment the inflationary pressures are easing very considerably. The
employment cost index came in pretty much as expected at this
particular stage.
I would say that the underlying credit and money
aggregates are clearly not inflationary. And in my judgment the costs
of the insurance of an additional decline in rates of this order of
magnitude borders on negligible.
I think that the prime rate will
move down at this point and it will have some effect.
Other elements involved in this decision come out of
discussions I've been having with some of my European and Japanese
colleagues who are part of the G-7.
But I might add parenthetically
that what we're discussing now has nothing to do with the G-7.
During
tomorrow's conference call, which is still on as scheduled, I hope to
fill you in, in some considerable detail, on a very interesting G-7
meeting held on Sunday. However, I have been getting indications--or
I should say a little stronger than indications--from our colleagues
in Europe specifically that they hope we might find it possible to
move rates down largely because they're running into some really
serious troubles in the ERM. They view the upside pressure of the
dollar in the last [few] weeks against all European currencies, and
against the mark especially, as creating significant problems for
them. And obviously it is also undercutting our export potential,
especially if Europe is slowing down at the pace that now appears to
be the case.
In summary, I would say that, in line with the FOMC
discussion on how events might or might not materialize, clearly what
is happening at this stage is a slowing in the rate of decline but
virtually no useful evidence in the order books or in the advance
indicators of activity that suggests we are coming out of this

4/30/91

[recession] any time in the immediate future. That's all I have on my
agenda. Does anybody from the Board wish to add anything?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

What was the vote?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The vote was 4 to 1. Does somebody have
the press release to read? Jerry, that press release for some reason
is not here in the room; we'll get it. Don, why don't you-MR. KOHN. It cites weakness in the industrial sector and
capital goods; it cites progress on inflation; and it notes that the
move is partly a catch-up with previous declines in rates, which is a
code word for saying that not all of it will be passed through. Those
are the major elements.
MR. KEEHN.
effective?

When will this be announced and when will it be

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
effective immediately.
MR. PARRY.

It will be announced momentarily and

Will you send out a press release to the Reserve

Banks?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That will be done immediately.

MR. HOSKINS. Could Don Kohn bring us up-to-date on the
growth paths and add anything on the projections?
MR. KOHN. Yes. We're seeing the money supply slightly
weaker than we thought at the FOMC meeting. I don't have any updates
for this week, but as of last week we saw about 3-1/2 percent M2
growth in April; at the FOMC meeting we had 5 percent. And we saw
about 1-3/4 percent M3 growth and at the FOMC meeting we had 3-3/4
percent for April. So, both looked a bit on the weak side for April
but not by very much.
MR. ANGELL. Don, the fourth-quarter average to the end of
April that you projected last week was a 4.9 percent growth rate. The
midpoint [of our M2 target range for the year] is where?
MR. KOHN. The midpoint is 4-1/2 percent; from Q4 to April M2
is growing at a rate of 4-3/4 percent, so we're right around the
midpoint. It's not much different; it's about in line with what we
had at the FOMC meeting. There may be a little weakness emerging, but
not much. But we had projected this deceleration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Let me read to you the operative press
release statement:
"The action was taken in light of continued
weakness in economic activity, especially in the industrial and
capital goods areas, and evidence of abating inflationary pressures.
The reduction, in part, realigns the discount rate with market
interest rates."
Any further questions or comments?
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our Bank has not moved yet on the
discount rate. I suppose we can do it all from here through one of
our colleagues who is back at home. But is there any urgency to get
it done today?

4/30/91

MR. ANGELL. I presume that it would not be that dramatic if
you were one day later. It would be up to each Reserve Bank to
determine.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I don't know. Don, why don't you
respond to that? The question is: Should the Reserve Bank presidents
call their banks to get the discount rate

[change] done today instead

of tomorrow?
MR. MULLINS.
MR. KELLEY.

Is there a problem in delaying it a day?
Is there any problem if they do nothing?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I think it would be helpful if it were

done today.
MR. KOHN.

Yes, it would be better today--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. If you can do it today, it would be
helpful.
MR. KOHN.
already in.

--although the press release notes which banks are

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Were there five banks in?

Five banks, correct.

If there is nothing
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anything else?
else, we'll reconvene for a conference call tomorrow at 9:00 a.m.
eastern daylight time.
END OF SESSION

