Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 14, 1991

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C., on Tuesday, May 14, 1991, at 2:00 p.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas,
and Minneapolis, respectively
Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Patrikis, Deputy General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Messrs. Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey, Scheld,
Siegman, Simpson, Slifman, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Hooper, Assistant Director, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Ms. Greene, Mr. Lang,
Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Rolnick, and Rosenblum,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
St. Louis, Cleveland, Kansas City, New York,
Philadelphia, Boston, Minneapolis, and Dallas,
respectively
Mr. Judd, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco
Ms. Meulendyke, Manager, Open Market Operations,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
May 14, 1991
[Secretary's note:
The Committee approved the minutes of the March
26th meeting at the start of this meeting.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any comments raised by the
report on the examination of the System Open Market Account--agenda
item 2?
If not, would somebody like to move that?
SPEAKER(?).

So move.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. We have a memorandum
from Mr. Mattingly on amendments to the Rules Regarding Availability
of Information. Virgil, do you have anything to add at this
particular stage?
MR. MATTLINGLY. No, I think these are technical. The major
reason is that the Committee is required by law to have a fee schedule
for processing requests under the Freedom of Information Act, so we
Because we had to do so, we
came forth with these recommendations.
suggested certain other changes to the rules to update them. They are
all technical; they don't result in any substantive change in any of
the disclosure policies of the Committee.
issue?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions at all on this
If not, would somebody like to move acceptance?
SPEAKER(?).

Move it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection. Gretchen Greene,
would you now report on foreign currency operations?

me;

MS. GREENE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope you can hear
I'm suffering from the same throat ailment as some others here.

[Statement--see Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Ms. Greene?
somebody like to move to ratify the transactions?
MR. KOHN.
MS. GREENE.

If not, would

There is nothing to ratify.
There were no transactions.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No transactions. That's easy. Thank
you. In that event, let's move on to the report of the Domestic Desk.
Peter Sternlight.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Sternlight?

Thank you.

Questions for Mr.

5/14/91

MR. FORRESTAL Peter, what was the foreign participation,
particularly Japanese, in the Treasury refinancing?
MR. STERNLIGHT. It was quite strong in the 3-year, rather
modest in the 10-year, and about average in the [30-year] bond. The
I think the major deficiency there
bond had really light coverage.
was domestic demand; customer demand was really on the light side.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

On the 30-year bond auction I noticed a messy
MR. MULLINS.
tail and light coverage. How much of that had to do with this botched
bid problem?
MR. STERNLIGHT. There was, as you note, a botched bid; but
it still would have been quite light coverage.
MR. MULLINS.

But the tail wouldn't have been there?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. MULLINS.

The tail wouldn't have been as big, but--

We don't have an automated auction system!

MR. STERNLIGHT. We're working on it, Governor; we don't have
it yet but I would say that even an automated system is not going to
remove totally the possibility of botches from time to time.
MR. MULLINS.

How about the noncompetitive bids?

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't remember specifically;
remember their being out of the [ordinary].

I don't

MR. KOHN. On the 3-year note, they were very close to the
previous one; but I'm not sure about the 10- and the 30-year issues.
MR. MULLINS.
had ticked up a bit.

Okay, I thought there was some sense that they

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Are you surprised by the narrowing of quality
What do you think
spreads at the long-term end of the market?
explains most of that narrowing, particularly that involving less than
investment grade securities?
MR. STERNLIGHT. I'm a little surprised at the extent of it.
I think the big widening of spreads occurred, and particularly got
exacerbated, during that somewhat scary year-end period when some
genuine systemic concerns were beginning to emerge. As it was clear
that we were getting through that period and that the economy was,
though in a downturn, not in utter collapse, I think there was reason
to expect there would be some narrowing. So, the fact of some
narrowing shouldn't be any surprise; but the extent of it has been a
little more than I would have predicted.
MR. KOHN. On the index I'm looking at, which is the Merrill
Lynch index, although the spreads have narrowed by 4 percentage points
from their highs around the end of the year, as Peter said, they are

5/14/91

back to where they were in the first half of 1990.
percentage points over where they were in '86, '87,

And that's 4
and '88.

MR. KEEHN.
Peter, the 30-year Treasury rate, which seems to
be going in the wrong direction, is hard to judge. What is the
market's view on this?
Is this a supply issue--just a very heavy
volume of financing coming to market for [unintelligible]--or is this
inflationary expectations?
MR. STERNLIGHT. It's very hard to sort out.
I think both of
those factors are there, President Keehn. Recently the most potent
concern has been just the sheer supply. But lurking in the background
there is concern not so much about a lot of inflation expected but of
recovery expected and concern that there will be more competing
demands for long-term financing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any other questions for Peter?

MR. HOSKINS.
I just have a short one for Peter. The
Bluebook indicates that the [funds] rate traded low because of market
expectations. And I was wondering if you were having trouble
signaling to the market.
MR. STERNLIGHT. There was that one occasion when the funds
rate was sagging in mid-April and there was even some speculation
beginning to build up that we were deliberately being tolerant of
lower rates, and we thought it was good just to clear up those
misperceptions by going in early one day. And I think the market got
that message quite clearly on that occasion. Through virtually all
the rest of the period the market seemed pretty clear in its
perception of what they thought we basically were aiming for.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the actions of the Desk?

Would somebody like to move to ratify

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Is there a second?

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Mike Prell.
MR. PRELL.
Appendix.]

Move it.

Without objection.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Let's now move on to

[Statement--see

Questions for Mr. Prell?

MR. SYRON. Mike, on inventories:
What do you make, if
anything, of these stories that we have a smaller number of retail
outlets for any given volume of sales and that there is a secular
Is that something worth paying attention to?
downtrend in this?
MR. PRELL. Well, I've made the argument for a long time now
as I've looked at the trend of inventory-sales ratios in retailing.
I've looked at the enormous growth in floor space in retailing and the
many shopping malls that have opened up. We have developed an awful

5/14/91

lot of stores.
Each one of them has some inventory. They have
clearly moved beyond the point of adequate returns and we're seeing an
industry shakeout. And in the course of that shakeout we probably
will have some consolidation over time and some movement down in
inventory-sales ratios.
That's a very macro sort of view of the
process.
But clearly retailers have moved to try to capitalize on
computerization and some of these other [techniques] such as "just-intime" deliveries.
They should be doing better on inventories than
they seem to have done, and maybe this is part of the story.
MR. SYRON. What makes it a little hard to tell exactly is
the lack of some abstract notion that targets what the inventory-sales
ratio is and how far we are-MR. PRELL. We still don't hear a lot of complaints that
inventories are uncomfortably heavy. On the other hand, the profits
aren't there.
Something is out of kilter.
I think this excess
capacity in the industry is reflecting part of the excess stock of
consumer goods on the shelves.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. One of the reasons for weakness in the second
quarter is the pickup in nonfarm inventory liquidation.
If you look
at what we know in terms of sales and industrial production, which is
admittedly very sketchy, do you think it's possible or would you say
more likely now that we could actually see the pattern that seemed to
be developing in the first quarter continuing in the second? That is,
could actual inventory liquidation turn out to be less in the second
quarter than in the first?
MR. PRELL. Well, I think you put your finger on the problem
in saying anything with any great conviction at this point:
We don't
have much data. We've looked at orders to try to see beyond the data
for recent months that we have on industrial production. We don't
know a great deal about the flow coming in from abroad or going out
from current production; that's an unknown. We basically reached this
conclusion as one that was consistent with what we thought plausible
as a final demand picture and what we sensed was going on in terms of
production. Also, I think there is certainly in some sectors a desire
to achieve lower inventory levels. And, as I've noted, this is the
third successive quarter of substantial inventory liquidation. For a
recession that we entered with supposedly pretty lean positions, we're
ending up in total absolute dimensions with an inventory liquidation
that's pretty much in the ballpark of previous cycles--not relative to
GNP but simply in '82 dollar terms.
So, maybe there is some upside
risk, but I don't think there's a great desire to accumulate
inventories at this time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERN.
in personal income?
MR. PRELL.

President Stern.

Is there something unusual in what we're seeing

I don't think this is greatly atypical.

MR. SLIFMAN. Relative to what is happening to GNP, this is
not atypical.
In other words--

5/14/91

MR. PARRY.

But GNP has been strong.

MR. SLIFMAN. The falloff in GNP, assuming our forecast is
right, would be about half the typical peak-to-trough decline in GNP.
But if you look at the ratio, say, of personal income to GNP, that
ratio has its own cyclical pattern.
MR. PRELL. And we may not be getting, overall, the kind of
cushion we did in some cycles in terms of the government sector. But
I don't think there's a gross disparity here. We were disappointed,
as I noted, in the first quarter; much of the surprise was in data
revisions.
Some of it seems quite plausible to us.
Previously, the
interest income figure seemed to be holding up more than appeared
reasonable in light of what was happening to interest rates.
So now
we've had a significant reduction in interest income in the figures
for the early part of this year. It's reasonably sensible.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
very simplistic manner.

They calculate that interest income in a

MR. PRELL. Well, of course, they use the very best data that
are available:
our flow-of-funds accounts!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike?
can we have our "tour de table"? Who wants to start off?
Si.

If not,

MR. PRELL. Let me correct something. We did have some
numbers and I blanked out on this. We're getting more DPI decline in
this recession than on average in prior recessions. That's what I had
in the back of my mind, but then I was thinking no other data I had
seen looked different from that.
MR. PARRY.

Again, is that relative to the GNP decline?

MR. PRELL.

Yes, especially since this is a lesser GNP

decline.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Who would like to start?

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the District remain
unchanged from the last meeting. You will remember that having come
through the early phases somewhat better than other areas of the
country, the data have now caught up with us, and the current level of
activity in the Midwest, I think, is very much reflective of national
conditions or already perhaps even a little weaker. There may be some
tentative signs of improvement, but nothing specific to suggest that
we have reached a turning point.
I think you can tell from Mike's comments, and it's certainly
true in the District, that the critical area of focus is the auto
industry. Our District will not show a real-side improvement until we
see a sustained pickup in the level of retail auto sales.
With the
first and second quarters essentially complete now, the 1991 model
year really has been a big disappointment. The forecast of total
sales for the full year was being pulled down to 12-1/2 to 13 million
units and even that reduced level is quite dependent upon having a
good improvement in sales in the third and fourth quarters.
And
though car inventories at the retail level are really quite low at

5/14/91

this point, the dealers are still reducing their orders substantially.
At the time of the last meeting I reported that orders by retail
dealers were in excess of or within the sales level. That has turned
around. The dealers have turned quite negative and are ordering cars
at about 80 percent of the current sales level, and that's, of course,
very unusual for this time of the year. In part, the dealer attitudes
are based on the fact that many of them are losing money; at this
point something like 50 percent of the dealers are in loss positions.
Despite this, given the seasonal factors of course, production in the
second quarter is going to be up quite a bit from the very depressed
levels in the first quarter. Still, that higher level of production
will be substantially under the production levels of the second
quarter of last year. But because of this shift between the first and
second quarters, in a production sense the industry is going to be
less of a drag on GNP than it was in the first quarter; indeed, it
might have something of a positive effect. As a final comment on the
auto industry, I certainly would say that the enormous first-quarter
losses that the Big Three experienced have cast a big pall on the
Detroit area.
Many of the other sectors of the District are impacted by the
auto situation. In the steel business, for example, one of the CEOs
They
was telling me that his business was, in his term, "rotten."
currently are operating at about 70 percent of capacity. The forecast
of shipments for the year has been reduced from 85 million tons last
year to 76-77 million tons this year. And of that reduced level,
about 20 percent is going into the export markets; of course, those
sales have very little margin, so there's not very much profit there.
Other suppliers of the auto industry are equally hard pressed. Some
of the other parts of the District also are having a fairly weak time
of it. Construction activity, for example, continues to fade.
Construction contract awards are off very substantially from last
year; through March the awards level is something like 26 percent
under last year's level. And people in the concrete business say that
they are experiencing something of a free fall.
More positively [for prices], though, the news in the
agricultural sector is really quite good, mainly because of a reduced
level of exports. Corn and wheat prices are under [downward]
pressure; that's going to hold down farm income. Nonetheless, I think
in an inflationary sense that ought to be good. Due to heavy rains-we have had a lot of rain in the Midwest--planting is about 10 days
late. But this is really a good problem, not a bad problem. People I
talk to say that the planting conditions really are excellent. And
while it's certainly far too early to judge the outlook for crop
production, at least at this point it looks pretty good.
Also positively on the inflation front, based on my talking
to people, I think the price outlook is continuing to improve.
Competitive conditions in the marketplace are awfully tough. Price
increases are just very, very difficult to sustain. And people who
keep track of their raw material purchases say that they are
experiencing very little price increases on raw material purchases.
The CEOs, looking ahead, still don't have any expectations that
they're going to experience a very big price escalation.
Net, while in a national context we may well be reaching a
turning point, certainly we don't yet see it in the District. From

-7-

5/14/91

our perspective within the District an improvement is going to be very
dependent on the auto sector--an improved level of sales following the
end of the model year production--and also an increase in exports.
Certainly at this point both of these objectives seem agonizingly
elusive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. President Black.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's downward
revision in their projection of real GNP for the second quarter makes
sense in light of the incoming information. More generally, the
overall profile that they've predicted for the next three or four
quarters strikes us as eminently reasonable given the staff's policy
assumptions, the behavior of most of the leading indicators, and the
pattern of recent anecdotal information. It's interesting to me how
close the projections of the staff are to those of the private
economy. Mike suggested theirs were a bit stronger, but it seems to
me they are remarkably close, which is something that many people
might view with alarm given the record of forecasters in the past.
I
might be one of those except that I believe they're about right on
this. And I believe that the risk of error is about equal on the up
side and on the down side. I guess the most important question we
ought to ask ourselves is: How great is the risk that we will have a
big error on the down side? In other words, how likely is it that we
will get a significantly greater decline in the current quarter than
the staff expects and that this will be followed perhaps by a greater
decline in the third quarter? Obviously, we can't rule that out
entirely; but in the absence of some totally unlikely, unexpected
negative supply shocks such as we had last August, the probability of
that kind of decline seems to me to be pretty low. We've already
taken out a lot of insurance to prevent such a thing happening, with
the cumulative policy actions over the last six months or so. And
beyond that, we're now seeing new signs of life in residential
construction, strength in the stock market and some of the other
leading indicators, and a recent upturn in the National Association of
Purchasing Managers' index, which was higher in April than it was in
the lowest quarter trough of any previous full economic upturn.
So, those all suggest to me that we are probably now very
near the bottom of a recession. Whether it's going to be longer or
whether it's a near trough, I don't know. But it seems to me that a
significant further weakening is decidedly unlikely. I was
particularly glad to see that the staff has reduced its inflation
forecast because I have felt for some time that we had followed a very
wise policy [course of] action and that it would pay off in terms of
inflation numbers. The staff has cut a couple of notches off the
inflation projections for both this year and next year and they're now
predicting a core rate of inflation of about 3 percent at the end of
1992. And I think we ought to have at least that degree of progress
against inflation. But it is important that we keep in mind what the
staff has assumed when it made these projections, and that is that
we'll come very close to achieving the midpoint of our target range
for M2. I think it's critically important that we take whatever steps
are required to keep M2 somewhat in that range in case the recovery
and consequently the money demand turns out to be somewhat stronger
than it now appears to us that it might be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

5/14/91

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, activity in the Atlanta
District is generally the same as in the rest of the country as a
whole, although I must say that the business people I've spoken to
recently are somewhat less pessimistic than they were six weeks ago.
In the immediate Atlanta metropolitan area, the sentiment has gotten a
big boost by the announcements from UPS and Holiday Inn that they are
moving corporate headquarters there as well as the awarding of the
fighter aircraft contract to Lockheed. The most positive event that
has happened is that there have been significant increases in sales of
single-family homes in the last several weeks. On the retail side,
consistent with the report we had this morning, retailers in the
District are reporting a pickup in sales in March but activity in
April fell off and was below their expectations. Tourism, too, has
picked up as well as convention bookings in the District, and that is
Foreign visitors are beginning to come into
interesting to note, too.
the area again after the Persian Gulf situation; that's particularly
true in Florida.
In the manufacturing area, orders are still fairly weak,
employment levels continue to be reduced, and capital expenditures are
still being postponed by most business people that we talk to.
Exports from the District have also been weak; some are attributing
that to weaker growth abroad. But I think another factor to be taken
into account is that military shipments from the District ports
displaced regular shipments; that probably accounts for some decrease
Crop
in that export activity. The agricultural area is quite mixed.
production probably will be lower this year but fruit, vegetable, and
Si mentioned the rains; we've also had
livestock should be higher.
heavy rains almost throughout the entire District and that has delayed
All of the states in the
planting in practically every state.
District have been hit, as have many others of course, by revenue
shortfalls. Up until now in our District the legislatures have
resisted any major tax increases. But if we don't get a turnaround in
the economy fairly soon, I think most of the states in our District
are going to have to look at major tax increases next year.
The credit crunch seems to be about the same as it was at the
time of our last meeting; that is to say there really doesn't seem to
be much change in the standards that the banks are applying. The
problem, according to most bankers, is on the demand side. There just
Price increases, as someone
isn't a great deal of demand for loans.
else mentioned, are minimal if not nonexistent; and that seems to be
what is expected over the next several months.
Looking at the national economy, we've lowered our forecast
since the last meeting. We're somewhat weaker in both '91 and '92
compared to the Greenbook, but not appreciably. We have both
consumption and exports weaker and as a result our unemployment is a
But we also show a little better success on the inflation
bit higher.
I think the risks in the
side; our inflation number is a bit lower.
forecast are more symmetric now than they were several weeks ago-I have been saying
certainly more symmetric than they were earlier.
right along that I thought the risks were on the down side; I'm not so
sure that they're completely on the down side now. But, and I think
Bob Black was alluding to this, the costs of missing are really not
That is to say, it seems to me that the costs
symmetric at all.
involved in overshooting the forecast are not very high, given the
present levels of capacity and unemployment. But if the economy turns

5/14/91

out to be weaker than the forecast, then I think the costs would be
very, very high indeed. Obviously, we need to take that into account
as we set our policy recommendations.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, the Twelfth District employment
statistics have become a bit weaker since our last meeting, although
the District as a whole continues to outperform the rest of the
nation. In March only the state of Arizona reported a month-to-month
gain in employment in our District. However, the declines in the
District's other states follow several months of relatively robust
employment growth. Employment levels still are between 1.6 and 4.8
percent higher than they were a year ago in District states other than
California. And that would compare, I think, to a fall of about 1.2
percent in the rest of the nation. California's economy has slowed
with the nation. Since last July employment has fallen nearly every
month; in April the state posted its first year-over-year decline in
the level of employment which was down 0.4 of a percent. Durable
goods employment continues to fall, led by declines in aerospace and
electronics.
I think some of our losses were gains in the Atlanta
District.
Construction employment has fallen to a level about 8
percent less than it was a year ago but, interestingly, real estate
sales and prices have picked up. As a matter of fact, the median
price of residential real estate in California is now above its
previous peak.
The effects of California's economic slowdown, combined with
growing structural problems in the state's budget, have resulted in a
projected $12.6 billion deficit by the end of the next fiscal year.
Tax receipts have been low for rather obvious reasons: weak sales,
weak consumer spending, and also unexpectedly low corporate and bank
profits. At the same time, case loads in the health area, welfare,
and especially at prisons have risen sharply, and mandatory cost-ofliving adjustments have further increased required expenditures. At
the same time Governor Wilson has proposed [reducing] the deficit
through a 1.5 cent sales tax increase--the tax right now is 6 percent
or higher based upon some local initiatives--elimination of all COLAs
on programs, and shifting some state services to the counties,
although no one can figure out where the counties are going to get the
money to finance this. Where this will all end up is difficult to say
because the governor is adamant about not changing income taxes.
As far as the national outlook is concerned, our view is not
very different from that of the Greenbook. We have slightly slower
economic growth and a bit less inflation. We expect the economy to be
roughly flat in the current quarter and then we think real growth
probably will average somewhere in the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range in the
second half, which is a little weaker actually than the Greenbook.
Next year, we look for growth to slow a bit to 2-1/2 to 3 percent.
It's clear that the main sources of expansion should be the easing of
monetary policy, which President Black referred to, a gradual
improvement in consumer and business confidence, and a pickup in
inventory investment.
It also seems quite obvious that the recent
rise in the dollar and slower economic growth abroad are going to
limit the contribution to growth that will be coming from the foreign
sector.
In view of the slack in the economy and also the lower oil

-10-

5/14/91

prices and the higher dollar, we would expect inflation as measured by
the CPI to decline next year to about the 3 to 3-1/2 percent range.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER. With regard to the national economy, we have no
quarrel with the Greenbook forecast.
For the Eleventh District, we have been right at the top of
the Districts in terms of maintenance of employment levels. As a
matter of fact, we were probably number one until a couple of months
ago; I believe about a month ago the Kansas City District overtook us.
But now we're beginning to experience a decline in employment and a
rise in unemployment rates. Many of our local unemployment rates are
now at or above the national average.
The strongest data in our
District are in Texas, particularly the Houston and the Gulf Coast
areas.
Petrochemicals and energy seem to be helping them a little.
The impression we get from our directors is that growth is positive
but barely so.
Borrowers in our District believe that the credit crunch is
very real; they always have and still do. Generally, bankers have
been telling us that there is just not good credit demand. The Texas
Bankers Association did a poll the other day and the majority of them
said there was a credit crunch and that it was all the regulators'
fault that it existed. State finances are tight, too, and Texas is
beginning to talk about an income tax.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The economy in New
England is very poor, with few spots showing improvement; [there are
some exceptions], primarily housing. Perhaps most disturbing is that
I think this may have to do with just getting further into a
recession; an enveloping feeling of gloom has affected everything.
And I see that it spreads further down in the Northeast, actually.
As other people have noted, we too have continued problems
with state and local governments.
If anything, the estimates of the
deficits on a state-by-state basis are increasing and increasing in a
fairly significant way, which will absolutely necessitate significant
tax increases. The retail situation, however, is a little mixed.
Durables are not good; autos in particular are very soft, although
nondurables have picked up somewhat. Some mail order houses
particularly have noted a pickup in demand; a lot of that is probably
[goods] sold out of the District.
Interestingly, consistent with
improving their margins, some [chains]--and we still have to see how
this will work out--actually are charging for postage on catalogues.
Commercial real estate continues to decline. As I mentioned,
housing has picked up a bit for first-time [buyer] units, which in our
District at this stage of the game are homes whose prices total less
than about $200,000.
Manufacturers seem to have become quite
pessimistic even in the computer area where things have picked up a
little nationally. Suppliers to the auto industry and to the
aerospace industry are quite pessimistic. Interestingly, we have
several defense contractors some of whom--for example,

5/14/91

-11-

--also have a significant part of their business in the
commercial sector, and they have said that on balance any improvement
they got on the defense side was washed away by the regular civilian
They still see this long-term reduction in restructuring on the
side.

defense side.
well behaved.

Prices, consistent with all this, continue to be pretty

Our lenders are quite cautious. Even a couple of our largest
banks will say, essentially, that they are not lending unless it's
extremely good credit. Others that are in a little better shape will
tell you that they just are concerned about the loan quality coming
in. But universally they are seeing very, very little in loan demand.
As a consequence, they just don't want money. I think this is related
to what is going on in the monetary aggregates. Some institutions
that have had potential customers come to them are really lowering
their offering rates quite a lot. Those are people coming from
institutions that are closing or have capital [problems] and from
others that don't feel they need any money. I'm not quite sure how
one factors this into evaluating the situation, but at least in New
England--and I suspect more so nationally as well--this issue of
restructuring that we've talked a lot about both in financial services
and manufacturing, and what is happening in inventories and in state
and local governments, does make a situation in which one has to look
at the employment numbers at least somewhat skeptically as we go
forward. Once managers get into this process of feeling that they can
have the same level of output and maintain their margins by reducing
costs if not increasing sales, they discover all kinds of
opportunities that I think they're going to exploit for some time to
come. I was struck by talking to several people who were saying that
there's still more to do here and that they are discovering new
opportunities.
One interesting story that fits with what is going on in
inventories--showing that this is again a two-sided sword--is that we
talked to an off-price discounter who indicated that business was
horrible but the reason business was horrible wasn't so much that the
demand in the stores was horrible; it was because manufacturers had
maintained their inventories more carefully and he wasn't able to pick
up the volume of distress sale goods that he could before.
Nationally, I find the Greenbook forecast very plausible on a
center-weighted basis. One would really have to nitpick to find fault
with it. It is more useful to ask what the risks are. I would think
that in a very, very marginal sense the risks might be slightly on the
down side; I see the third quarter falling into the same pattern as
the second quarter conceivably, typically because of concerns about
exports. But I do think--and this goes back to what Bob Forrestal
said--that one needs to look at the risks of the outcome, if you will,
not just the risk of something happening. If we were to get much
further deterioration than we expect, that could be fairly difficult
to deal with given the problems that we have in some sectors. On the
other hand, one has to be very encouraged by at least the forecasted
improvement in prices that we see. It really would be tragic to throw
that away. So, I think it's very hard to be sure of the outlook at
this point, which makes it extremely important to follow the data that
continue to come in very, very closely.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

5/14/91

-12-

MR. STERN. Mr. Chairman, I would continue to characterize
conditions in the District as mixed, but overall not bad. Agriculture
is looking pretty good. The key word there, as usual, is moisture,
and in much of the District it now appears to be adequate this year.
The livestock sector is really doing very well, as it has over the
past several years as well. In the paper industry and the forest
products industry, again, conditions are mixed. There is a lot of
excess capacity at the moment in paper and even more coming on
[stream], but the profits aren't there. But that's a business where
they tend to run at capacity almost no matter what, and they're still
running at capacity, at least in our District. The wood products
business has come back a bit, and that's probably a consequence of an
inventory cycle and maybe some optimism about the outlook for
homebuilding. Clearly, housing sales have picked up substantially,
certainly in the Twin Cities. It's my understanding that not only are
houses selling but they are selling at pretty close to asking prices
without any fancy financing so far as I can tell. On retail sales,
once again I haven't heard any horror stories. Some people say
business is tough and some say it's satisfactory, and that seems to be
about the way that has been holding. Only one state in the District
has a significant budget problem with which they have not yet come to
grips. I don't know at this juncture what the pieces of that
resolution might turn out to be.
With regard to the national outlook, I'm pretty comfortable
with the Greenbook forecast. I also think, as several people have
commented, that it pays to reflect on the risks a bit at this
juncture. The risks are probably symmetric in the sense that while a
recovery by midyear is likely, I do think we're going to need to see a
good deal more consumer spending. In that regard, I have been under
the impression, and Mike confirmed it, that perhaps disposable income
has been somewhat weaker than I would have expected throughout this
contraction, and that is certainly a source of concern in my mind. On
the other hand, as to the risks on the inflation side, I find the
recent data encouraging and most of the anecdotal reports I'm getting
encouraging as well. But I must say I'm not persuaded yet that we
have nailed down a significant reduction in the core rate of
inflation. I'm a little puzzled as to why the bond market has not
responded at this juncture, not just to the inflation news but to the
overall picture of what is happening domestically and abroad. And I
wonder if we don't have to be a little sensitive to that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
doesn't explain it?
MR. STERN.

You mean [the volume of debt financing]

No, I don't find that an adequate explanation.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. In the District, the signals are mixed but on
balance I think the overall District economy is still down like that
for the nation. As in the nation, commercial real estate and retail
sales are generally negative. There are some indications that
manufacturing is beginning to bottom out.
The only clear area of
upturn is in home sales. Loan demand is still weak. Bankers say that
there isn't demand; the business people--or some of them, anyway--say
that the bankers won't lend. With regard to state and local

5/14/91

-13-

governments, Philadelphia is about to go broke; the states have
deficits. So, I think that situation is fairly general.
I would say the attitudes vary from cautious optimism, with
more emphasis on "cautious" than "optimism," to a lot of concern on
the part of business people about when a recovery will occur and what
I find more people who are just about writing off
kind will occur.
I sense,
1991 as a bad year and they are beginning to look to 1992.
and I don't think it's particularly unusual at this stage of the
business cycle, a dichotomy now between those who analyze the economy
I think most of those who analyze the
and those who manage it.
economy see signs that the economy is beginning to pick up, whereas
those people who have annual meetings to chair--whether they want to
downsize the company another notch or they are going to meet the
financial analysts--want to be reassured that there really is a
recovery out there; they don't really yet feel it in their bones.
We're at a fairly critical period in that, if we don't begin to see
some tangible evidence on a broader base that we are indeed going to
get a recovery, we could see confidence really drop off and we might
I do subscribe to the
have a double-dip in terms of the downturn.
notion that the economy is going to pick up, but I think we're playing
I would say that the risks are
with some tender attitudes out there.
But I [agree
probably even to maybe marginally on the down side.
If we don't get a
with] those who are concerned about the outcome.
recovery or if it's postponed, I think there will be some real costs
and it will be quite difficult to try to get the economy turned
around.
On the inflation side, my sense is that financial markets may
be somewhat behind in appreciating what is going on in most of the
economy. We're making better progress on inflation than I would have
expected a few months ago and that's positive. I think the long bond
market has some catching up to do there. As for the Greenbook
I would probably have more of a
forecast, I think it's reasonable.
saucer shape kind of recovery--perhaps a little weaker--but it's hard
to quarrel with the basic analysis there.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. In the District itself
In
we continue to see some modest pickup in economic activity.
manufacturing, for example, the auto plants are not back full out, but
the Ford plants are running two shifts and a large General Motors
plant in Kansas City itself is beginning to put people back on [the
It also has raised a problem in that they simply have begun
payroll].
to use overtime rather than put a second shift back on. And the
unions have become very upset because auto manufacturers haven't put
the second shift people back to work. As a result, I think they're
It does seem quite clear to me
trying to manage [unintelligible].
that although the auto makers' projections are not strong, there will
be some positive impact on our output in the period ahead simply
because they are starting from a very low base and they are at work
and are producing. In the aviation area, general business aviation-They had very good
the small jets, for example--is still very good.
bookings and sales in the first quarter and that is projected to
Construction remains sluggish, particularly in the
continue.
commercial area, but in the residential and other nonresidential areas
some pickup is evident.

5/14/91

-14-

The agricultural area has already been discussed. The winter
wheat crop looks to be fairly good and is spotty only in the sense
that we've had some fairly severe weather come through the Midwest and
that could be devastating to wheat at this stage in its development
simply because of the hail and strong winds. But by and large there
The problem, obviously, is
is a fairly optimistic view of that crop.
the weak commodity price for wheat. Nonetheless, it's better to
produce than not to produce. Cattle producers, as I've indicated
before, are doing very well, and that's projected to continue.
In the energy area, drilling has slacked off I think simply
because the stability of the imported oil prices at $20 a barrel or
thereabouts does not encourage very much exploratory drilling. There
has been some development drilling. That is, after a field is
discovered, it has to be developed, and there is some modest activity
going on in that area.
The other area of optimism in the energy field
is the oil field suppliers who take some encouragement from the Gulf
contacts that they established as a result of the Persian Gulf oil
catastrophe.
With regard to the national picture, I have no great quarrel
with the Greenbook forecast. As a matter of fact, I think it's a good
deal better than it has been in the past. We believe that the staff
is a little over-optimistic on the timing in that their second-quarter
forecast is considerably stronger than we have, although the second
half of the year really comes out about the same.
So, it's simply [a
difference in] timing. When we scaled back the second quarter we
scaled back a bit from where we were before. But, on balance, it's as
good a forecast as I think one can make, and it's a believable
forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, Mr. Chairman, on the forecast
first:
We have a profile at least that is similar to Mike's, although
But
not quite as strong--especially in the second half of the year.
certainly [we expect] a respectable recovery over this six-quarter
period. Mike did mention several areas of uncertainty. One of the
reasons why our recovery is less robust than the staff's is net
exports; the staff essentially has net exports plateauing and we have
a $20 billion deterioration built in over the entire forecast period.
I don't have a lot of confidence in that forecast and I think Mike
made the point earlier that it could go the other way. But it is in
marginal terms an area of great uncertainty in this forecast period.
And the difference between 0 and +20 or 0 and -20 in terms of the kind
of growth rates we're talking about here is not inconsequential.
Another point I'd just mention about the forecast--several people have
mentioned it--is the state and local sector in a context in which the
underlying thrust of fiscal policy is probably on the restrictive side
as well.
The state and local [data] have all kinds of smoke and
mirrors in them and it's hard to know what the real picture is.
But
it's hard to dismiss the possibility that there could be a greater
measure of difficulty there, especially because these problems are so
pervasive. There are darn few states and certainly few major cities
that don't seem to have pretty hefty fiscal problems. Again, the
smoke and mirrors makes it a lot harder to judge how difficult that
may be.
But, as I said, I would associate myself with those who feel

-15-

5/14/91

the risks in the forecast probably are more symmetric than they were,
in part because of the changes in policy that have been made.
On the anecdotal side, we clearly hear report after report to
the effect that the residential construction market is looking much
better. In your old neck of the woods of [northern] New Jersey,
Tommy, one of the thrift people was telling me the other day that in
the first three months of the year the stock of existing unsold houses
in Summit was cut in half. That's one little community, but that
community is not a trivial piece of the puzzle up there in northern
New Jersey. The commercial side is lousy. And in the industrial
sector, the comments that I get from big manufacturing companies
Of course, a lot of these guys
continue to be sour across the board.
are sour all the time so you don't try to make [much] of that. But
one comment you do get from these guys who are sour all the time is
that there is a higher sense of anxiety about the outlook for their
exports over the next four to five quarters.
It's also important at this point to note--and several people
have touched on various facets of this--that we can now see several
areas in which some good things are happening that are not entirely
unrelated to the kind of policy that we've been following. For
example, balance sheet rebuilding even in the face of the decline in
the saving rate in the household sector is making some real progress.
And what we're beginning to see in the corporate sector is also
noteworthy.
Indeed, if you look at some of the things that were going
on in the second half of the '80s, particularly for the companies that
aren't already bankrupt, this reverse of the old phenomenon is not
Taking a longer view, I think this balance
entirely inconsequential.
sheet rebuilding, while it may temper the recovery, could turn out to
be a very healthy development for the intermediate term even though it
may dampen things a bit in the near term. Somebody mentioned--Dick
Syron, I guess--that restructuring is taking many forms and includes
state and local governments. I think that is now more than straws in
the wind and that's beginning to pay off. I'm trying to remember,
Mike, when the last time was that we had a 2.8 percent decline in GNP
and a 1 percent rise in productivity; I'm sure it has happened, but
not very often. And that in itself may be symptomatic of some of
those things.
A number of people have mentioned the inflation situation,
and I have to say that in this area there has been a change in my
thinking. For the first time since the so-called core inflation rate
plateaued at around 4 to 4-1/2 percent in 1984, I think we have a pop
I've
at penetrating that 4 to 4-1/2 percent core inflation rate.
never felt that in this entire period. Now, like Gary Stern, I'm not
ready to bet the ranch on it, but I do think that the inflation
I still have to wait a little to see if
outlook is distinctly better.
we can get through that threshold. My hunch is if we can get through
it, we might have a reasonable chance of staying through it.
So, I think the outlook is still murky; there are plenty of
uncertainties. But on the other side of the coin, I can see in a
number of areas things that might bode well for the intermediate term.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER.
I haven't heard much change in the kind of
anecdotal information we've been hearing for the last couple of

5/14/91

-16-

months, though there is a somewhat more positive tone to it, with
strength in the obvious places but no evidence in those comments of
new areas of strength and no new areas of concern. One other comment
on the anecdotal side I would make is that Jerry mentioned the sour
comments from manufacturers and I wonder--and it's too early to tell
now because I suspect their orders are still pretty lousy--whether
they're going to be expecting too much out of this recovery. They may
be thinking of more traditional recoveries. My guess is that it's
still going to be a very difficult environment in which to do
business. On this point I was amused that when Alan was in St. Louis
a month ago we heard one manufacturer who heads up a very well-managed
company fussing about the margin pressures. He said he hadn't seen
anything this bad since '74-'75. But subsequently, having seen their
first-quarter earnings, there was another increase--maybe a record.
So, there are some people who like to tell us how tough it is.
As for the numbers themselves, as was noted before, the
positive information we're receiving is mostly anecdotal and it isn't
there in the numbers. In our District it's starting to show up in the
numbers through the first quarter. We actually had nonagricultural
employment growth at about--not quite--a 1.5 percent annual rate.
Manufacturing is still weak; that's primarily in transportation, autos
and aircraft. And in nonmanufacturing and services, there was
strength across the board with most of the contribution being from
wholesale and retail trade and services. We also had growth in the
construction sector. The previous four quarters all had declines, so
this was the first positive quarter in nonresidential construction
contracts in over a year.
On a broader basis, one comment I want to make is on this
inflation question. I'm somewhat troubled the more I hear comments
about and see in the press good reported inflation numbers. When I
say in the press, I mean comments from market observers--I don't
associate this with what Jerry was saying before about better reported
price numbers in the short run--that somehow that gives policy room to
move. I have two reactions to that. One is that I think the numbers
we're seeing now are the result of actions taken many months ago, if
not years ago. And in that sense I don't think they justify any
action on our part in the short run if policy is in the proper
position. The second aspect of that, and the more important, is that
these are declines from unacceptably high levels to somewhat lower but
I think in a longer-term context still unacceptably high levels. What
I'm saying is that if the policies we've put in place over a long
period of time are working, we're going to go through a fairly long
period where we're going to see better price numbers, but that in and
of itself shouldn't be a justification for easing. There is this
rather simple-minded concept sometimes in the financial markets that
somehow that gives the Fed room to ease and I just don't buy it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. There are indeed mixed signs out there. But I
think we should note that the three major forces that took us into a
downturn are no longer there. We no longer have any energy/oil price
escalation that is eating up purchasing power; most of that price
increase is now out of the system, as we've seen. The housing price
situation, whether it's deflation of disinflation, has changed;
whatever it is has slowed down. We're in an environment in which we

5/14/91

-17-

have improved affordability of housing, and I think that going from a
minus to a plus is a rather significant factor. And we're already
seeing what is happening in regard to the autos--at least the
inventory adjustments that already are there. That leaves us, then,
with [a question of] what it might be that would take the economy
another leg down. And I frankly do not believe that the risks of that
I suppose it certainly is true that if net
happening are symmetrical.
exports were to falter, having been as strong as they've been, that
But
would be an offset to some of these other areas of improvement.
it seems to me rather unlikely that we'd get that much movement in net
exports with the time lags that generally exist in the net export
sector. Now, I think we should note that bond supply always tends to
increase during a periods of downturn, which impacts government
revenues. But what happens to the financial markets is that loan
demand generally falls off as much; so during most recessions we get a
typical downward movement of long-term interest rates that exceeds
what we've had this time. We can do all the talking we want about why
it is that the financial markets do not see the improvement that we
see; and yet there are people who are making bets with real money and
I don't think they have any reason to want to be biased. As long as
we maintain money growth above the [bottom of the ranges] that we have
adopted--and certainly we've maintained it around the midpoint--it
would be conducive, it seems to me, to an increase in nominal GNP, if
not quite as robust as you have it, Mike. Nevertheless, I would
expect nominal GNP to increase rapidly enough that this improvement in
inflation that everyone is anticipating thereby provides that kind of
It may very well be time for us to be patient with regard to
growth.
being willing for that phenomenon to take place. What is wrong with
nominal GNP growing 1 percent less than we have projected if that
means that we're going to make that much more progress on price
stability?
When the bond market really sees that [progress], then I
think we'll get the additional stimulus that will come from a normal
That has not happened
cyclical decline of long-term interest rates.
in this cycle.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Not a lot has changed around the District since
the last meeting. There has been no drastic drop-off in anybody's
Really,
order book that I can find and no drastic increase either.
very little has changed. We're running at an unemployment rate
somewhat higher than the nation. And the same comments that others
had about pessimism apply to the District.
In terms of the national outlook, I have some discomfort
perhaps even with the way we structure the meeting. We talk in these
meetings about the forecast as if it's something that we can control;
we can control the forecast but not the outcome very well. There are
a number of real events that we simply are unable to anticipate that
will change the actual outcome from the forecast.
So, we almost set
it up in some sense to lead us toward more of a fine-tuning approach
than I think is warranted by the knowledge that we have as
That leads me back to Tom Melzer's and
policymakers or as economists.
Wayne Angell's comments in terms of what we ought to be thinking about
in the future, and that is not to be making tradeoffs for inflation
and employment.
It seems to me that that's nothing but a potential
Because the inflation rate is low by the standards of
problem for us.
recent history that is no reason not to continue to press forward with

5/14/91

-18-

what I think is the right thing for a central bank to do, which is to
eliminate inflation. We can look at long-term interest rates all we
want but there's not much we can do about them unless we get rid of
the uncertainty about inflation. And the way to do that is to have a
credible and predictable policy.
I think at this point the Federal
Reserve's credibility will be tested and it's very important for us
not to err in that test.
I'll save the rest of my comments for the
[policy discussion].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I have been very disappointed in
the fact that a rather aggressive pattern of moves toward ease over
the past several months has not really resulted in much more stimulus
to the economy than the refinancing of existing debt.
That leads me
to the conclusion that perhaps we have a somewhat different kind of
phenomenon here, namely that we have a real crisis of confidence that
doesn't necessarily get cured by repeated signals of monetary ease.
I
guess I'm convinced that the number of things that are acting against
renewal of confidence in the economy is very significant. First of
all, we have genuine concerns about the health and the future of the
banking system, which I think are very widespread. We have corporate
profits that are very disappointing. We have a very heavy debt burden
remaining for consumers, for businesses, and for governments--to the
extent that the fiscal problems of state and municipal governments
really have taken away their ability to have any stimulating effect on
the economy.
In fact, there's an overhang of apprehension on the part
of both businesses and consumers that these problems of state and
local governments can only result in higher taxes or reduced services
or a combination of both. We have press reports of layoffs and
restructurings and bankruptcies; we have lackluster performance in new
orders that certainly has damped business enthusiasm for expansion.
And the stubborn resistance of long rates to respond to lower rates on
the short end is a reflection, I think, of inflationary expectations
on the part of the public.
I believe that, until confidence picks up
in some fashion, the economy is likely to remain sluggish. Therefore,
that leads me to conclude that the risks in the forecast really
continue to be on the down side.
But for the life of me I don't have
a good solution as to how to stimulate that recovery in confidence.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I'm hopeful that the economy is pretty much on
track for bottoming out this summer or in the third quarter.
The
evidence does suggest that it is contracting at a slower pace. We see
that in the industrial production numbers, employment data, the
purchasing managers' report, and maybe even in the retail sales
numbers.
There continue to be things that bother me. Paralleling
what Mike did, I have a list of moderating influences on the strength
of the upturn; it started out with only the debt overhang and
commercial real estate as the two factors.
I've added financial
fragility--although maybe I can retire that one--higher unemployment,
state and local government problems, the higher dollar, weaker foreign
economies, and now some inventory concerns in some sectors.
So, the
weight of these moderating influences is becoming a bit heavier.
It also seems to me that the Greenbook story this time in May
versus March is a little less satisfying; it may be more accurate.

5/14/91

-19-

But it is unlike the old story, which had a starring role for the
consumer to lead us out of the recession--propelled by increases in
real income as oil prices dropped, a wealth effect out of the increase
It has been
in stock prices, and a rebound in consumer confidence.
four months since the market rebounded, four months since oil prices
collapsed to pre-war levels, and two-and-a-half months since consumer
confidence rebounded. And now in the May Greenbook we're projecting
consumer spending to grow not nearly so fast as we were projecting it
in the March Greenbook. Obviously, consumer spending grew a bit
faster in the first quarter. The saving rate remained low but
personal income didn't grow. Governor Angell asked what will take the
economy a leg down; I guess I'm wondering what will take it a leg up.
I wonder if there's enough impetus in this new story to get us moving.
In the new recovery script, the consumer takes a less prominent role
and we project these three factors to lead to the recovery:
It seems
homebuilding, inventory accumulation, and capital spending.
to me that each one is promising and each one has some question marks.
There's every reason to be optimistic that the housing
rebound is real. The issue remains that of translating housing sales
into housing construction. I think there's reason to be optimistic
when one sees the volume of debt and equity issues by commercial banks
It is clear that banks are going
bolstering their capital positions.
to apply higher standards in lending to homebuilders, but maybe with
improved capital conditions they will not extinguish the housing
upturn.
I'd say there are still some questions, though, on the
translation of the home sales into homebuilding.
On inventory accumulation, I wonder how much we're going to
get out of this. Companies either have moved or are in the process of
moving to a fundamentally different philosophy of inventory
management; they now have improved information technology to implement
I think
a philosophy involving very tight management of inventories.
businesses will seek to maintain very lean inventories when the
economy turns up. There has to be some contribution from inventory
accumulation when they stop cutting inventories, but even when there's
a little wind in the sails from some other source, I wonder how much
contribution we're going to see out of inventories.
I feel about the same with respect to capital spending. I
see little in the orders data to suggest optimism or little from
talking to the sour executives that Vice Chairman Corrigan talks with.
I think we're more likely to see capital spending in response to a
recovery lag the recovery rather than lead it or be coincident with
it.
It is encouraging to see the volume of stock and long-term debt
issues by corporations.
Most of that, though, is going into shoring
up balance sheets, which is a good thing; not much of it is getting
through to capital spending. Still, the availability of ample longterm funds on good terms should encourage some capital spending for
the competitiveness reasons that Mike alluded to, or at least limit
the decline in capital spending. I tend to think we'll have to see a
pickup in demand first before we see much [impetus from] capital
spending.
So, it does seem to me that the story is a little less
convincing than last time. I have a little less confidence in the
upturn since we have no reliable lead actor to replace the consumer.
Again, it may be more accurate, but it's not quite as simple a story.

5/14/91

-20-

And I think waiting around while the consumer flunked his screen test
for this recovery may be one of the reasons why there is some
increased gloominess, at least in the business community.
It may be
just the executives of large companies that Governor Seger mentioned
at lunch on whom the international situation--the higher dollar and
weaker foreign economies--is having an impact.
I think there
continues to be the worry that as we wait around for this [upturn]
there will be some atrophy in consumer confidence as it retreats
toward the real numbers rather than spending rising to meet
confidence.
The discount rate move a couple of weeks ago was useful
in injecting a little optimism into the picture and in demonstrating
that the Federal Reserve is still in the game. And I think
precipitating the prime rate reduction was a help.
Still, when I look
at the markets, I'm pretty reassured. The markets still seem in
pretty good shape, although they may be down a bit.
And they
represent not only a forecast of recovery but a contributor to it--not
only with the elusive wealth effect but also, as Jerry mentioned, we
see them freeing up debt capacity, including short-term debt capacity.
That means companies will be in good shape to respond to increased
demand, should that demand ever arise.
We've also absorbed a fair amount of bad news in the market:
another round of bank insurance fund bad news and some insurance
company bad news among those companies that specialize in high-yield
bonds. There continues to be some skittishness in the long-term bond
market.
It made some progress and then drifted back some, although it
is still off a bit, obviously, from the peak of over 9 percent in the
fall.
I tend to think that if you invest in 30-year bonds, you need
some real convincing on the inflation side.
The people who bought 30year bonds in 1965 at 4 percent own them today or were fired and the
new portfolio manager owns them. So, it's not surprising that after
seven years of core inflation at 4-1/2 percent it will take some time.
I agree with the sentiments expressed that we have the
potential for substantial progress in reducing core inflation and that
we should be careful on that front.
There has been some deceleration
in the monetary aggregates, which Don was talking about.
Some of that
was warranted to bring them more in the middle of the ranges.
When I
look at the interest-sensitive components of M2--money market deposit
accounts and savings accounts--they are still growing at a very rapid
clip and, if anything, at a too rapid clip.
Of course, time deposits
have been dead in the water ever since I've been here. The
deceleration in Ml is accounted for by currency and demand deposits
and there are plausible explanations--special factors associated with
April.
I don't see at this stage a serious risk of M2 growth
decelerating to an unacceptably slow rate, but in this environment we
ought to keep that in mind just as we should the other side as well.
We still have a good bit of stimulus in the pipeline. We see its
effects in the buoyancy of markets and the rebound of residential
housing.
And as the prime rate has been reduced, I think we may see
it more broadly.
Overall, I guess I'm a little more concerned than last time
about the path of the real economy; I swallowed the March Greenbook
whole and this one is a little less digestible. However, the markets
look pretty good and I think the policy looks pretty good, despite my
queasiness.
This is probably a time for patience, but it's also a
time for vigilance as well.
I think we should stand prepared to keep

-21-

5/14/91

The lengthening
things moving in the right direction if necessary.
list of moderating influences--the reduced forecast of consumer
spending, somewhat slower M2 growth--suggest to me less risk of an
overshoot in the current environment. And the current environment
When you're sailing and you try to
reminds me of a sailing analogy:
tack, which means to turn in a very light wind, what you do is push
the tiller over to the other side of the boat and you shout as
confidently as you can "hard-a-lee," which means "we are turning."
Then you wait and wait and hope a little puff of wind comes along and
I think we
grabs the sails and moves you off in the right direction.
have pushed the tiller and we are in the waiting phase. The only
reason I hesitate to use the sailing analogy is that I'm a notoriously
poor sailor and, when I try to tack in light wind, about half the time
I end up dead in the water drifting backward. But we have a much more
experienced crew on this ship, I'm sure!
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Want to make a bet?

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLY. Well, Normand, will you please make a note for
the next meeting that whenever Governor Mullins signals he wants to
speak, put me down immediately ahead of him!
There's isn't much left to say, Mr. Chairman. As I read the
statistics that are available to us, and more particularly as I listen
to the reports from the Districts, it may well be that the bottom and
I'm confident
the recovery are at hand, but they sure aren't in hand.
I'm not that
that they will be and that we are reaching the bottom.
I'm not sure what kind of
confident about the outlook thereafter.
strength we're going to get out of a recovery or how sustainable it's
I continue to have
I don't think those are sure things.
going to be.
considerable concern about the drag that's going to be present with us
I'm sure Jerry is correct that
for a while from balance sheets.
balance sheets are beginning to recover both at the household and the
corporate level. But I also wonder if that doesn't have a long way to
And I wonder, as that process does run its course, what the
run yet.
I don't see where our real strength is
implications are more broadly.
going to arise from. There are some good straws in the wind but none
of them look to me as if they're of the nature that they have the
strength to push or that we can be very confident as to their
sustainability. The exception to that is probably the inflation
outlook, which I think ought to help in a lot of ways that are both
visible and invisible. And, of course, there is a natural buoyancy to
this economy that, as Mike and others have pointed out, usually leads
to better results than one can see at any given point in time. But I
continue to think that perhaps the risks are not yet symmetric. For
the short term at least, they do seem to me to continue to be on the
As John LaWare
Confidence is the biggest fragility I see.
down side.
If confidence
said just a moment ago and as Ed Boehne said earlier:
doesn't continue to improve and begins to deteriorate, it could lead
But as far as our work
to some potential real problems down the road.
goes, I do think that policy has provided us with a good deal of
It seems to me from a
insurance against these gloomy possibilities.
policy standpoint that it's a time to wait and see how things develop.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
for coffee.

Thank you very much.

Let's break now

5/14/91

-22-

[Coffee break]
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you. Are there questions for Don?
If not, let me get started with an anecdote that I was confronted with
at the meeting of the Business Council last Saturday. They had me on
a panel on Saturday morning with the Chairmen of IBM, Penney, Morgan
Guaranty, Chemical, and Monsanto. And a gloomier set of forecasts you
will scarcely hear.
It makes the most dour view of this afternoon
[that of] a raving optimist. At the end of the discussion, it finally
got to me.
They all looked at me as if to say:
"Well, what are you
going to do about this?"
And I turned to the audience and said "This
sounds the way it always sounds right at the bottom of the business
cycle."
And the truth of the matter is, it did.
Now, that is not the
same thing as saying that if that's what it sounded like, therefore,
it is the bottom of the business cycle!
But it is true that when the
economy is at the bottom of the business cycle that is what it sounds
like.
In a sense I think the evidence is very clearly falling
gradually into place in that respect. The problem that we're having
in evaluating it is in part the consequence of two things that have
occurred, and they have been mentioned previously. One is the
structural change in inventory policy, which has limited the extent
that inventory accumulation is followed by massive liquidation, with
production levels substantially under consumption levels.
The total
system finally drains out and pops back. The second is the issue that
Don was raising:
namely, that as far as monetary policy and the
credit aggregates are concerned, we didn't have the counterpart to the
tightening as the economy since the peak [turned] into the break, the
liquidation, and the reversal. What we're seeing at this stage is a
far slower [than ususal process of adjustment], where in effect the
contraction follows the very heavy and excessive debt creation of the
1986-87 period, the subsequent gradual retrenchment of debt growth and
M2 growth, and basically, deleveraging beginning to occur, arriving at
a point where I gather we had record equity issuance in April.
And
the effects of this are very obvious. We're seeing that the quality
of balance sheets, as Mr. Corrigan points out, is improved. Despite
the fact that the banking sector is still fragile, there is no
question that the difference between the banking sector today and the
banking sector six months ago is really quite stark. The structural
weaknesses that we saw back then and the yield spreads and the
difficulties to borrow relative to what we have today I think indicate
that we have a much sounder [banking] system now.
I think the inflation numbers at this stage are really
credible.
If you look at them in detail, if you look at them in an
historical context and in an overall credit sense, unless inflation
has ceased to become a monetary phenomenon, something fundamental is
happening. And I think it is extremely unlikely to reverse. We're
picking up the benefits of several years of fairly substantial
improvement in all relationships of money, debt, and prices. But in
that context I think monetary policy gradually defused the overheated
economy and slowed it down to a point that in effect what I was
hearing at the Business Council was not that their orders were
deteriorating but that they were absolutely dead.
Nothing was moving;
everything was just absolutely frozen. The only problem with that is

5/14/91

-23-

that it appears, unless our data are just all wrong, to be allegedly
freezing at a point in which production, fortunately, is well below
It's not a question of
consumption levels. And that has to run out.
an inventory pickup; it's basically the end of inventory liquidation,
which has been the classic element to turn around the economy in every
pickup after recession that we've seen in the post World War II period
and I'm sure earlier.
So, when somebody says "What's the spark?
What's going to move us?" the implication is that everything is in
balance. The problem at this stage is that it's not in balance.
Unless the data are all just wrong, we are undergoing a rate of
liquidation at this particular stage, despite the fact that we have
this structural change [in inventory management], that cannot persist
very much longer because businesses are running out of stocks. And at
that point production begins to move, real income begins to move--the
classic Keynesian stuff, to whatever extent it works--and that's when
it works. We get the multipliers working and the whole economy begins
to move. The problem is that it's happening very slowly.
I think John LaWare raised the relevant question here.
This
is a confidence issue. We can sit at this level for quite a while and
eventually everyone will get discouraged and pull the plug on the
capital goods market. Even though the capital goods markets have come
in below our forecast, it does not appear from talking to a lot of
people that what we are seeing are cancellations and major
contractions. What we're seeing fundamentally are stretch-outs in the
capital goods markets because we can see the appropriations backlogs
are holding. Everything is holding. The only thing that has changed
is the fact that instead of doing it today, it's "manana;" but it's
still there. The danger is that they will become so discouraged that
eventually everyone will start to contract and pull in their horns;
and then we will get a secondary double-dip in the recession. At this
stage, even listening to all the gloom that I did on Saturday, I don't
get the impression that there is a widespread initiation of
cancellations of projects, as distinct from stretch-outs.
So, I think
we have a little time. The trouble is that everything is going in
such slow motion because of the inventory and the credit [situations]
that it may be too slow to get us out of this in time. But the
elements are here. The basic [issue] is that we cannot sit with
everything as it is now because the levels of production are too low
relative to consumption, and something has got to give.
One thing that disturbs me, which disturbs a lot of you, is
that we are uncomfortable about where long-term rates are.
Obviously,
should bond rates back up, then the mortage market will back up and we
could abort [the recovery] in the residential real estate markets,
which are still healthy. But I suspect that the difference between
the analysts and the managers, as Ed Boehne called them--and it was
the managers that I ran into on the Business Council--is that the
managers are operating as though they are serving the level of demand;
the analysts are saying they're not.
And we're about to find out
whether or not the data really tell us anything.
All this suggests to me that we probably just ought to xerox
the last directive and rerun it, because I can't see any argument that
So, I
I at least find plausible to push us on one side or the other.
would just put out as an initial recommendation, "B" symmetric.
Governor Angell.

5/14/91

-24-

MR. ANGELL.

Mr. Chairman, I agree.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
SPEAKER(?).
OTHERS.
MR. KOHN.

Okay.

I do too.

Four.

Five.

So do I.
That's two.

Three.
Six.

Me too.

Norm, it will be fun writing the policy record on

this one!
MR. GUFFEY.
I have just one [comment].
I happen to agree
with what you said with the exception that if the aggregates--in
particular M2--do not come in as projected over the next couple of
months, I would have some concern about the outlook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, Roger, I would suggest that
that is probably telling us that the capital goods markets are
beginning to fade.
It may be one of the early signals the Committee
gets about the need to be very watchful. Who was it who said we ought
to be vigilant?
Was it Governor Mullins?
I think the money supply
may be a very weak tool, but I suspect in the current period it may be
far more serviceable than it has been in a very long time.
MR. GUFFEY.
I think there's some informational value over
the next couple of months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
And we also need to take a look at
the weekly asset side of the intermediary system, which reconciles to
the money supply--disaggregate it into real estate loans, business
loans, [and so forth] and in a sense try to see what the obverse of
money supply elements is.
Right now the data indicate a definite
weakening in business loans, but I suspect that's being offset by
issuances of securities in the long end of the market, so it's not a
contraction. But if we get what you're concerned about, I think we're
going to see it on the asset side of the intermediary balance sheet
and it would be quite suggestive of the type of problems we worry
about.
MR. FORRESTAL.
I'm perfectly willing to xerox the last
directive, Mr. Chairman. But for the record I'd like to indicate that
while I believe the risks are somewhat more symmetrical than they
were, I would still prefer an asymmetric directive simply because I
think that if we do move between now and the next FOMC meeting, it's
going to be a move toward ease.
And I think we ought to have that
reflected, but I don't feel that strongly about it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's probably factually correct, but I
think the tone of the balance of risks is symmetric.
In fact, I think
you put it exactly right:
The balance of the risks is probably
symmetric even though the policy risks may be asymmetric.
Si.
MR. KEEHN. I agree exactly with what Bob Forrestal has said.
I have a slight preference for asymmetric language, but I don't feel
strongly about it.
And I do absolutely agree with both the current
situation and with [policy] as you see it.
It's a fairly long time

-25-

5/14/91

between now and the next meeting, and a question comes up in my mind.
Presumably, we have now established that you have the right to move
I
policy, and by that I mean the fed funds rate, by some amount.
don't want to get into that but what would cause you to make a change
as you look at the data that may be coming up in the next few weeks?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the up side?
MR. KEEHN.
CHAIRMAN
major issue would
kickback from the
again, I think we

Well, do you mean on the down side or

The down side.

I would say on the down side that the
GREENSPAN.
If it's beginning to show a
be the money supply.
weak April and all of a sudden it starts to dip down
had better be careful. Don did mention that.

I think the data had been [unintelligible] but in the last
loan officer survey even though the rate of tightening is much less it
is still tightening. And in a sense there are liquidity questions
because it's very hard to figure out how in the world we would get
significant interest rate reductions in the context of very subnormal
money supply growth and an exchange rate that is firming not only
In other
against the European currencies but against the yen as well.
words, there are some people, and I have a certain sympathy for this,
who are saying in effect that those are indications that monetary
policy may be too tight. However, if the money supply is moving
But if we end
adequately, I would say it's a hard argument to make.
up with a situation in which the money supply is beginning to shrink
and/or the dollar is beginning to firm very extraordinarily, or if we
get some really weak [economic] numbers--and that I would say at this
point is unlikely unless something cracks--we need something. I think
the Committee has actually created enough of a bottoming here that
some new force has to come on stream to knock the economy down. As I
said here the last time, the danger is really the capital goods
markets.
If the capital goods markets hold up, I think we're out of
the woods. But as I think all of us are saying--that's right, Jerry
raised it and I forgot all about it--the real issue here is that if
all of a sudden the stock market falls on its face and breaks business
confidence, then we ought to be prepared to move pretty quickly.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

[Then] we've got problems.

MR. KEEHN. Well, I haven't looked at the calendar of the
data that will be coming out over the next three or four weeks, but
I'm simply saying that if there were some indication of basic
weakness, I would hope there would be an opportunity to move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If it is of the form that's cumulative.
But if it merely reflects what anecdotally already is in the system,
that probably is not new information. Look, durable goods orders for
April I assume are going to be down. If they're down by huge amounts,
then we've got to look at it; but if they're just moderately down, I
don't see that that is telling us anything new.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I think what President Keehn is
hinting at, if I may, is that it might not be a bad idea to have
rather firmly in mind a consultation in the first week in June or
something like that.

-26-

5/14/91

MR. KEEHN.

Thank you!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Why didn't he say that!
It's
inconceivable to me that we can get through the next three weeks
without something happening that is not important to talk about.
I
would assume, even if there's nothing to say, that we ought to meet.
Does anybody else want to comment?
MR. MELZER. I just want to explore the stock market issue.
We talked to some investment managers a week or so ago and my sense is
that some are expecting some sort of a correction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.

Oh, we did?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MELZER.
[Laughter]
MR. KELLEY.

We just got it today.
How much?

Down 37.

Well, I'm not sure that's what they had in mind!

Are you talking about 2600 to 2550 on the Dow?

MR. MELZER. Maybe this is a peculiar circumstance at this
time, but I think it's a little tricky to tie monetary policy into a
stock market predictor. I just don't know what the linkages are.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Don't misunderstand; I wasn't
suggesting that kind of rigid linkage. What I was saying is that if
we had a major "tanking" in the stock market, I think that would
rather quickly show through to other things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Suppose the market goes down 180 points?
Isn't that what monetary investors have in mind?
MR. SYRON.

In one day or over, say, a period of a week?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

No, in one day.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Tommy, if we had a very substantial
correction in the stock market, I think it would feed right into the
kinds of things that Don was talking about in terms of the confidence
factor and the double-dip factor.
MR. ANGELL. I guess I'm a little uncomfortable with the
conversation. The bulk of the conversation is agreement over the M2
growth and that seems to me a very good thing for us to be watching.
Quite frankly, the stock market has behaved rather robustly and we
didn't say that that means the recovery is going to be robust.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
stabilizing this.

I would bet you that it had an effect in

MR. ANGELL. Oh, I think it did, too. That's why some of us
were pretty confident about it.
Clearly, there would be a change in
confidence in our [unintelligible] if the stock market turned up at
2450.

-27-

5/14/91

MR. MELZER. Well, for the record, I would be in favor of
what you proposed as the policy prescription.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
there is a correction.

Anyone else before we vote?

If not,

Yes, to catch up with what has been happening
MR. BERNARD.
in the foreign exchange markets, the staff is proposing a change in
lines 35-36 from "increased somewhat further on balance" to "show
little change on balance over the intermeeting period."
This is in the Bluebook, Norm?

MR. BLACK.
MR. BERNARD.
MR. KOHN.

This is in the draft directive, line 36.

The one that was distributed.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

The one that was distributed.

MR. BERNARD. The whole sentence reads "The trade-weighted
value of the dollar in terms of the other G-10 currencies showed
little change on balance over the intermeeting period."
MR. ANGELL.

Fine.

I'd like to propose that we repeat the
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
directive, but obviously it requires some changes.
"In the implementation of
[It would read:]
MR. BERNARD.
policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
Depending upon
progress toward price stability, trends in economic activity, the
behavior of the monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign
exchange and domestic financial markets, somewhat greater reserve
restraint or somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in
the intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are
expected to be consistent with growth of M2 and M3 over the period
from March through June at annual rates of about 4 and 2 percent,
respectively."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
President Parry

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The next meeting is July 2 and 3, but
[in the interim] we will have one or more telephone conferences.
END OF MEETING

