Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
December 2, 1991

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan,
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Parry
Phillips

Chairman

Messrs. Hoenig, Melzer, and Syron,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, and McTeer, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, and
Dallas, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Lindsey, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson, and
Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr.

Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account

Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Gainor, Hendricks, and Oltman, First Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Minneapolis, Cleveland, and New York,
respectively
Mses. Greene and Lovett, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Bank of New York

Transcript of Telephone Conference Call of
December 2, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Governor Lindsey had a previous
engagement and I indicated to him that it was more important to keep
that than to join us. That way we will have a full complement of the
Board at the next FOMC meeting. This meeting, as you may recall, was
scheduled during our November 5th discussion, and it is an information
meeting to bring us up to date on events since November 5. I'd like
to start off by asking Gretchen Greene if she would bring us up to
date on the foreign exchange markets.
MS. GREENE. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The attitude toward
the dollar and toward the outlook for the U.S. economy is now pretty
much in line with what we described at the November 5 meeting. What
has changed principally in the exchange markets has been a reawakening
of the perception of exchange rate risks and with that a renewed
strengthening of the German mark. The dollar, looking across a
variety of currencies, is mixed relative to where it was trading on
November 5. It's unchanged on average. While [higher] against the
yen, it's lower against the mark by about 2 percent or so. But
between November 5 and now it has been even lower still. We are
benefitting at the moment from uncertainties about developments in the
Soviet Union. And, of course, we do not know how long and in what
form these uncertainties will be, looking ahead. The dollar has now
given up more than half of the gain that it [had achieved] early in
the year after the war in the Persian Gulf. And we have seen a number
of occasions in the intermeeting period when the dollar seemed to be
moving closely in tandem with developments in our domestic capital
markets. So far, the movements have been relatively [unintelligible];
but this could be a troublesome dynamic in a different form,
accentuating the anxiety in the financial markets if the dollar were
again to fall to a substantial extent. That's pretty much all I have,
Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any questions for Ms. Greene?
If not, if Joan Lovett is available, would she bring us up to date on
the domestic markets?
MS. LOVETT. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Since the cut in the
discount rate on the 6th of November, we've had some rate declines in
the domestic market. They have ranged from about 25 to 30 basis
points or so in the short end of the market where they have been
supported by expectations from daily releases over the interval
suggesting that there will be some further monetary accommodation
coming along. The periodic unrest in the stock market shored up the
short end, and from time to time some of the news coming out of the
Soviet Union also has been a factor in that direction. The rate
declines have been more grudging in the long end of the market where
rates in the longest maturities [unintelligible] since November 6. In
the long end of the market, some actual selling has been taking place
throughout this period without the kind of demand that we had in the
short and intermediate areas. And there is also a sense that the long
end of the market is somewhat hostage to the various rumors that have
come out from time to time about different fiscal stimulus packages
that might be coming along. So, the gains are more pronounced at the
short end of the market.

12/2/91

In terms of reserve management activities, the federal funds
rate over the period has tended to hold fairly close to 4-3/4 percent;
it has been a shade firmer than that over recent days. Reserve
management operations have been supplemented throughout the period by
outright purchases as we look toward the seasonal need to put in
reserves that is typical at this time of the year. So, our outright
activity has been of some magnitude over this period, and we used a
big chunk of the leeway that Mr. Sternlight had requested from you at
the last meeting. In terms of the stock market, which has been a
focus of attention, I should take the opportunity to bring you up to
date on that. This morning at the outset people were calling for a
decline of something in the one percent range following on the heels
of what had happened in some of the overseas markets this morning.
And as the stock markets have managed to hold above the 2850 level
today, it seems to have backed up from that. As we were coming in to
this conference call, stocks were actually higher on the day at a
shade above the 2900 level. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Ms. Lovett?

MR. LAWARE. Joan, this is John LaWare. The press reported
that there was some evidence that the Japanese were withdrawing very
significant amounts from the Treasury markets. There was an
indication that one Japanese investor was trying to withdraw as much
as $4 or $5 billion from the market. Do you see any signs of that?
MS. LOVETT. We heard such reports over this period. I think
people are trying to come up with a variety of [explanations] as to
what is underlying this market. I have heard that in the past year a
number of [times] in the long end of the Treasury market. These were
securities that had been borrowed by the Japanese prior to the end of
the last fiscal year and there are a variety of scenarios out there as
to just why they have been lightening up their holdings. The
magnitudes that you mentioned are estimates that have been around the
market waiting for such a volume of Treasury zeros [unintelligible]
that might come in for sale in that market from the Japanese. There
are some reports, of course, that the Japanese are taking profits in
this market and in fact [there is] a view about their placing money or
keeping money home. Some of it has to do with periodic rumors of a
[unintelligible] and no one has been able to come up with any change
that will fit this bill. I think they're pretty hard to come up with
specifically. But there's also a sense that the problem has to do
with the IRS taking a closer look at Japanese practices in the wake of
the stock market scandals and that people are cleaning up their books
basically for that reason.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions?
on to Mike Prell on the nonfinancial outlook.

If not, let's move

MR. PRELL. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the news since the
Committee meeting has been, on balance, decidedly negative. Just to
note the one outlier:
The housing starts numbers were certainly a
more favorable reading than we had seen in the September data. We're
a bit skeptical about the level of starts indicated by the latest
figures in light of all the other anecdotal information, and the sales
figures that we have in hand will be firming up that impression

12/2/91

tomorrow when we get figures on new home sales.
Otherwise, we've had
a string of negative surprises. Right after the Greenbook was
completed, as you know, we had the hours figures for October, which
indicated very weak labor income. Subsequent to that period, initial
claims have ticked up a bit, suggesting to us that in all likelihood
payroll employment will be down a bit when reported this Friday.
Consumer sentiment has soured further and the spending numbers through
the latest month show some further erosion of consumer demand for
autos and other goods and services. We found in the September
inventory figures a buildup that went well beyond the Commerce
Department's expectations, or ours, and that suggested to us that our
expectations with respect to inventory investment in the fourth
quarter had been perhaps too optimistic.
Now, it appears that there
may have been some influx of imported goods that showed up in those
inventory figures and, thus, that we might hope for imports to absorb
some of whatever inventory corrections we're looking at.
From the
orders figures and other information, we suspect that domestic
manufacturing activity will suffer some in the next few months. The
motor vehicle production schedules have been revised down to below
even our discounting of the earlier assembly schedules.
We think
we're going to exit this year probably with some decline in total
industrial production. Our sense is that the current quarter is
likely to be on the negative side of zero--not deeply so but negative
for real gross domestic product. And at this point, looking at the
trajectory and the lack of an obvious spur for an immediate
turnaround, the likelihood is that perhaps some additional inventory
adjustment might be sought in the first quarter of the year.
In an
environment in which layoff announcements will still be widespread and
consumer sentiment probably still very depressed, we may remain in
modestly negative territory in the first quarter.
It's obviously
early relative to our schedule for preparing the Greenbook, but that's
our general sense at the moment. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the financial outlook.

Questions for Mike?

If not, Don Kohn on

MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Money and debt growth
rates have strengthened just a little over the last few months and,
although they remain quite weak, they are about in line with what was
expected at the time of the FOMC meeting. We're looking at Ml growth
in November at a 12 percent annual rate and we'd project the rate for
the three months from September to December at about 10-3/4 percent,
which is more than a percentage point higher than we were thinking at
the November 5 FOMC meeting. A lot of this reflects demand deposits
and undoubtedly the drop in interest rates that occurred earlier in
November. For M2 growth, we're looking at 4 percent for November and
a little over 3 percent for the September-to-December period, which is
just about in line with the FOMC's 3 percent expectation; and that
would leave M2 right at the bottom of its 2-1/2 percent to 6-1/2
percent cone. M3 growth looks to be about 2-3/4 percent in November
relative to the 1 percent expected by the FOMC and about 2 percent
over the three months from September to December.
This also would
leave M3 right at the bottom of its 1 to 5 percent growth cone. Debt
seems to have picked up a little, according to mostly projected
numbers.
Insofar as bank credit is concerned, we had about a 6-3/4
percent growth in October and we're looking for something in the 6 to
7 percent range in November based on very preliminary numbers.
Business loans have weakened a bit from October to November, but

12/2/91

there's a small pickup in real estate and less weakness in consumer
loans within [the loans] category.
If not, I'd like to
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Don?
open up the floor for comments from governors and presidents on
developments in the economy or in the [Reserve Bank] Districts and any
views on the outlook and policy you wish to bring forward.
This is Ed Boehne, Mr. Chairman. I don't think
MR. BOEHNE.
there's been a major change in business sentiment since we met about a
Most of the reports from around the District--and most of
month ago.
these people have businesses in the District as well as national
businesses--suggest that [activity] is either flat or down. Most of
those reporting "flat" note that they're already at fairly low levels
And there are
and they don't see any encouraging signs of a pickup.
I sense in the manufacturing area that
clearly deteriorating reports.
we have had a couple or three months perhaps of negative growth there.
We're seeing that mostly from the point of view of what manufacturers
The
are telling us and also from cars from the Conrail people here.
retailers are somewhat mixed but they have very damped expectations
I would think that would be on the down
for the next several weeks.
The lending area, except for the refinancing of mortgages, also
side.
If there has been any really material
points to the negative side.
I have had a number of groups of
change, it has been attitudinal.
people in the Bank in recent weeks--a number of credit union people-and I found them to be fairly close to rank and file people when it
comes to pulse-taking. They were really quite negative, quite sour.
I was surprised at the number of times I heard the word "fear" used to
describe members of their credit unions and employees or companies
Where I come out is that we're still heading
that they represent.
I suspect it will spill
into negative territory for this quarter.
over into next year.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, Dick Syron. If I could continue on
I was talking to some retailers
just where Ed Boehne left off:
The
yesterday and this morning in anticipation of this call.
retailers here have had very, very negative expectations. Whether
it's because of that [I'm not sure, but] their sales generally are a
bit better than their expectations, although Sunday they were up
Overall, it's slightly better than they expected,
[unintelligible].
but one has to recall that they expected a negative trend and are
coming out at closer to flat year-over-year. It is interesting trying
Some of them were in a backed-up
to learn about their inventories.
situation or in re-organization. Actually on this issue of fear,
they're finding it interesting where
[unintelligible] and it's now an off-price discounter through the
Northeast and some of the Midwest. Actually, they did reasonably well
over the weekend. One of the two fellows who owns it had a call from
"Night Line" Friday; they said they wanted him to go on [the show] and
they would ask him what his experience had been. His experience at
that point had been positive and he told them he was going to paint
He may be overstating it, but
his experience as relatively positive.
he said he got the feeling that this didn't fit with the tone they
wanted to present and for that reason he was told he wouldn't go on.
They said it didn't really fit in with the rest of the program and
So, I think we do have a little selfwent on to something else.
feeding issue here.

12/2/91

As far as the economy as a whole goes, it's hard to differ
very much from what Mike said.
I would say it's most likely that we
will see some further negative developments in the early part of next
year.
And that's something we have to bear in mind very carefully in
thinking about what we're going to do.
MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Parry. Statistics in
the Twelfth District would indicate that things are basically [moving]
sideways. But in discussions with the Beigebook participants, it is
very negative.
As a matter of fact, the Beigebook for our District is
I don't know if this is
probably as negative as we've ever seen it.
[unintelligible] here or what it is, but there's no question that you
can't find them. And confidence [has deteriorated] in almost any of
the states that encompass the Twelfth District.
MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal in
Atlanta.
I don't think things have changed very much in this District
since we met in November.
In fact, I would characterize economic
activity as being fairly sluggish. But I must say that some of the
anecdotal information that I've picked up just over the last two days
is perhaps marginally more optimistic in terms of sentiment than it
was at the time of our FOMC meeting. Looking at some of the
individual areas, retail sales about a month ago were fairly good or
relatively good but the concern among retailers is the shorter-thanusual shopping season. I'll come back to some more recent information
on retail sales in just a minute. Auto sales were unchanged from
Manufacturing continues to be slow, particularly in
year-ago levels.
the construction-related industries. But we have seen some positive
signs in the food processing and the packaging and paperboard
My credit side banking contacts tell us that there has
businesses.
only been a slight increase in loan demand over the last month and all
are reporting that their credit [standards] have remained unchanged.
The only area in residential real estate activity that is doing
anything at all is houses in the lower price ranges.
I picked up two somewhat optimistic reports--optimistic in
the sense that they were so bad before that anything sounds better
This morning I
than what I had been hearing--over the last two weeks.
talked to a couple of people in the paper packaging and the paperboard
business and they both said that they are seeing some small pickup in
business. They're seeing some increases in their orders, some
inventory rebuilding, and the customers that they've been talking to
Now,
seem more confident than they were three or four weeks ago.
these people are not doing business just in the Sixth District but
around the country, so that view about their customers' confidence I
think is interesting. We did some surveying over the weekend on
recent retail activity and it seems that weekend sales were better
than expected. Again, of course, the expectations were not very high
so it failed to measure what the real gains might be year-over-year.
Discount stores and people who are selling moderately priced goods are
outperforming the traditional retailers such as the large department
stores.
And there is some concern--someone else mentioned this, I
believe--that low inventories may restrain sales as we get closer to
the Christmas holiday. And picking up on what Dick Syron said,
several retailers reported to us that the negative press is affecting
attitudes and making consumers quite afraid to move into the market.
So, while this is not a terribly bright and optimistic outlook, it is
marginally better than at the time of the FOMC meeting, as I said

12/2/91

earlier. Mike came out with the view that we still have a very
sluggish economy throughout the country and I think that's going to
spill over into the next quarter.
MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn. In a District
context, the economy continues to slow; it is still on a negative
trend but [unintelligible] the last meeting I think are continuing in
moderation. Other than that, I would say that conditions in the
District are a little worse than they were at the time of the meeting.
As always, the auto industry is the key to activity in the District.
I talked to one manufacturer this morning; they're still finishing up
the numbers but their guess is that November probably came in at about
12-1/2 million units and that is a little lower than their estimates
of two weeks ago. The order rates from dealers to manufacturers are
One manufacturer had order rates
still lower than production levels.
that were coming in at about two-thirds of their production level and
they're continuing to do that. The risk is that manufacturers'
inventories [will rise] in addition to dealers' inventories, and that
So far they
has some implications for the first quarter of next year.
Indeed, one steel supplier
have not backed up as much as expected.
told me this morning that they've had some deferrals of shipments in
the first quarter but not as much as they would have guessed. They do
anticipate both for the end of the year. Otherwise, the Chicago
purchasing managers report 62.7 [compared with] 56.2 in October. On
the down side, new orders with backlogs are down. You'll soon get
[the Beigebook report] on retailers here but we did have a chance to
talk to a number of our retailers, and they felt they had a good
weekend. Their sales level was about 10 percent higher this year than
However, they do point out forgotten
in the same weekend last year.
[unintelligible] because of the length of [the selling season].
I must say I find this a very difficult environment, and the
outlook is especially murky. But I certainly have no reason to
disagree with the forecast Mike has given. While I recognize that
this is an [unintelligible] to me, nevertheless, it does seem to me
And in
that the risks at this point continue to be on the down side.
light of that, I'd continue to ease.
MR. HOENIG. Mr. Chairman, this is Tom Hoenig. Activity in
our District is moving mostly sideways. Agriculture is showing some
weakness and energy continues to be quite weak. There is some
activity still in the residential construction area and some nonbuilding contracts for infrastructure [projects] in the western part
of the District. Manufacturing is pretty mixed. The auto industry
has still been producing; [they] suggested when we talked to them that
they will be cutting back shortly. In the food processing industry
and in nondurable goods some jobs are still being added in our area
and that is balancing things out.
In the retail sales area, I would
We've had
really prefer to say that it's a little too early to tell.
mixed reports; some are indicating that while [dollar sales] are down
But generally they are pretty
the volume seems to be a little better.
pessimistic in that area.
I think that is in part due to the press as
well.
Overall, our District continues just to hold its own; it's not
showing any significant improvement. At this point there's no sense
of a terrible downturn or of [conditions] being great either.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, Bob Black. As you will see when
you get our section of the Beigebook, things here in the Fifth

12/2/91

District look about like everybody else has described. But there is a
thread of optimism about what lies ahead six months or so down the
road, and this is something we have not seen until recently. We were
extremely pessimistic--the most pessimistic I can remember in the
postwar period. But there does seem to be a bit of a change that was
a surprise.
It was a welcome change.
MR. MCTEER. Mr. Chairman, Bob McTeer from Dallas. My sense
is that our economy is about the same; I don't think it has changed
noticeably over the past month. We did do a retailer survey this
morning to try to get a feel for what happened over the long weekend.
Given the diminished expectations, that was fairly positive. Most
areas reported sales a little better than they had anticipated. If we
had to put a figure on that, we would estimate [an increase] somewhere
in the area of 3 to 4 percent over the comparable period last year.
The real estate situation down here seems to be fairly quiet and
stable.
There is some residential activity that tends to offset a
continued weak nonresidential situation. Things have been very much
the same.
MR. MELZER. Alan, this is Tom Melzer.
I've been on [this
call] since the beginning but I didn't interrupt you at that time. I
would say that conditions in the District have not changed much since
the last meeting either, as others have said. We touched base with a
number of our major companies here.
Major retail department store
chains ended up, with what happened on Friday, with a better November
than planned but a somewhat disappointing start for [December].
The
pattern of sales over the weekend [was] very good on Friday, not quite
so good on Saturday, and worse on Sunday. But in general they're more
optimistic about the Christmas season certainly than what is reported
in the press. And I did hear the same comment that someone else
mentioned:
That the press was really affecting consumer confidence
and their performance.
In three other industries--chemicals,
electrical equipment, and consumer nondurables--the reading I got was
that business is about the same as it has been. They don't see any
dramatic deterioration and don't see any dramatic improvement.
In the
chemical area there is really no sign of a double-dip there. The
order pattern and shipment pattern are holding up [among] major
customers of the auto industry. And that generally confirms what
someone said about suppliers not seeing a major downturn in their
business. Even if they did, I think they feel that they are geared to
handle that without a major change in their business.
In the
electrical equipment area, there has been an improvement in consumerrelated orders, primarily for tools.
One area where I did pick up
some sense of a downturn is in the paper industry. There was a very
strong pull-out in September and October and some decline in November
--perhaps somewhat more than the expected seasonal decline.
One final comment:
It is interesting that among people
I've talked to in this context and other contexts, I don't find
anybody asking for monetary policy to do more.
If anything, a concern
is evolving among business people that monetary policy is going to be
asked [to do] too much and that in the process it will lose sight of
longer-term goals. There was no pressure for further ease in any of
these conversations.
MR. HENDRICKS. Mr. Chairman, this is Bill Hendricks in
Cleveland.
We don't see much change in the past 30 days. What we see

12/2/91

is an economy moving sideways.
A couple of our directors reported to
us:
One of them reported some layoffs in the apparel industry; and
one who talked about construction indicated that it was flat but not
hurting in the Fourth District.
Overall, we find that people are
marking down slightly their expectations for the first quarter.
MR. OLTMAN. Mr. Chairman, this is Jim Oltman in New York.
Things here also seem not much changed. We continue to see [activity]
as flat, at best, for the foreseeable future--in the short run at any
rate.
Our observation here, though, is that our directors and others
have heard that projection for a while now and their patience for that
explanation seems to be wearing a little thin.
It's not that there
seems to be much around in terms of anecdotes about very pronounced
declines, but it's perhaps more of a generalized sense of
discouragement.
Indeed, I think our directors' response to our own
presentations on the economy have changed from skepticism to
discouragement. And I'd like to echo what President Melzer said:
There seems to be a generalized feeling here that not too much at this
stage can be expected of monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. GAINOR.

Is President Stern out there?

Mr. Chairman, this is Tom Gainor in Minneapolis.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Tom.

MR. GAINOR. There's no substantive change here either.
At
our Advisory Council meeting last week, about half reported flat
activity and the other half were more optimistic than that.
Retail
sales over the Thanksgiving weekend were affected by a record
snowfall, which didn't do much for the retail sales.
It did do a
whole lot for the sales of snow removal equipment!
That's the one hot
spot in our District.
One other positive note was that the
did report some pretty good activity in residential building
going on in this area.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I was thinking about how I would
summarize this discussion and it comes out as follows:
The anecdotal
[reports] from most of the participants are negative and increasingly
so; the analytical material coming from the Districts seems a bit
better than expected; and the macroeconomic evaluation at the Board
seems negative.
So, I guess we have a choice of any of a remarkably
broad range of views.
I have a suspicion that we're going to learn a
great deal more in the next several weeks; certainly in the next few
days we're going to be getting a lot of data. But there's a sense
that we're near a [stage] of some form or another where the economy
sort of sits still for a while and it might pick up some momentum.
But if it starts to deteriorate, there's a lot of downside [risk].
While my [feeling] basically is that the future is always unknowable,
there is something about the most immediate period in that it seems to
have outdone itself in that respect.
In any event, I think we ought
to be watching the markets fairly closely and, short of an unexpected
conference call, we look forward to seeing everybody on December the
17th.
Does anyone have any further comments, questions, or reactions
If not, the meeting is adjourned and we will see you
before we close?
all on the 17th.

12/2/91

-9-

MR. ANGELL. There was a bit of restraint here on the part of
the Board members.
Maybe we wore ourselves out in this morning's
briefing!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Quietude amongst the Board members was
such as to set a precedent! I thought it was quite interesting in the
sense that things were a tad more optimistic.
END OF SESSION

