Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
September 13,

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

1991

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
LaWare
Mullins

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Mr. Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Messrs. Beebe, Lindsey, Promisel, Siegman,
Simpson, Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Wiles, Secretary of the Board, Office of the
Secretary, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Messrs. Monhollon, Oltman, and Thomson, First
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, New York, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Hoenig, Senior Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City

Transcript of Conference Call of
September 13, 1991
MR. BERNARD. Good morning, everyone. This is Normand
Bernard at the Board.
I'd like to run through the attendance very
quickly. Here at the Board, all of the Board members except for
Governor Kelley and also Presidents Corrigan, Black, and Forrestal are
in attendance. And representing the San Francisco Bank, Mr. Thomson
[Secretary's note: Mr. Bernard then called the
is here at the Board.
roll to determine attendance at the Reserve Banks.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. I just want to
read to you a press release, which the Board is releasing shortly.
"The Federal Reserve Board today announced a reduction in the discount
rate from 5-1/2 to 5 percent. The change is effective immediately.
The action was taken in light of weakness in the money and credit
aggregates, the improving inflation environment, and concerns about
the ongoing strength of the economic expansion. The reduction, in
In
part, realigns the discount rate with market interest rates.
taking the action, the Board voted on requests submitted by the boards
of directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia,
Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, and Dallas. The discount
rate is the interest rate that is charged depository institutions when
they borrow from their District Federal Reserve Banks."
The data that came out this morning I assume everyone is
familiar with. Larry Slifman or Dave Stockton, maybe you ought to
take a minute and quickly review what the numbers are.
MR. SLIFMAN. First of all, the total Consumer Price Index
was up 0.2 percent and, excluding food and energy, the CPI was up 0.4
One of the big players there was the perennial problem with
percent.
If we were to exclude the
college tuition at this time of the year.
college tuition--I haven't actually done the calculation--I would
suspect that the core CPI would have been up more like 0.3 percent.
In terms of the retail sales data that we got this morning, total
retail sales were down 0.7 percent.
The total excluding the
automotive group was down 0.2 percent.
However, we did get an upward
revision to that grouping--the total excluding automotives--for the
month of July.
I haven't actually done the precise calculation yet
but I would suspect that on balance the level of retail sales in
August was probably about in line with what the staff had been
anticipating or maybe even a tad stronger.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SLIFMAN.

That I don't have.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. SLIFMAN.

There was a downward revision in June.

It's 0.2 percent.

You have more information than I do!

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, you'll find, I think that it's
probably even or a shade under.
MR. SLIFMAN.

Okay, a shade under.

9/13/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. So, it's not significantly different on
the control group, I would say.
MR. SLIFMAN. Basically, that's the only information that
we've been able to get. We haven't actually gotten the press release
on the retail sales data so we don't have the full breakdown yet.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Gentlemen, in light of this I would
propose that we allow 25 basis points to show through in the funds
rate.
I would solicit comments from members of the FOMC and the
presidents.
MR. KEEHN. This is Si Keehn.
your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
MR. GUFFEY.

Roger Guffey.

MR. STERN.

Gary Stern.

MR. SYRON.

Syron.

MR. BOEHNE.

Okay.

Are there any questions or any

Unanimous.

Eight?

Seven.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

I agree.

How many Reserve Banks were in?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. COYNE.

That sounds fine to me.

What was the vote of the Board?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

I would also.

Sounds good.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
further comments?
MR. BOEHNE.

I would certainly concur with

Seven.

Thank you.

I certainly agree
MR. MELZER. Alan, this is Tom Melzer.
And the action having been
with the action on the discount rate.
taken, a showing through to the funds rate ought to be allowed.
In a
sense, we almost have to.
I must say that in a long-term context, I
worry a little about reacting to current numbers on the real economy.
It just seems to me that at a turning point, we're going to see some
numbers that don't look too good and, in effect, we're reacting to bad
numbers.
I simply think this exposes us to the same sort of mistakes
that historically were made in monetary policy around turning points.
I have somewhat of a problem about it because I think we've [moved]
quite generously over the last three or four years and going into this
recession. And [unintelligible] need to.
The other thing that
troubles me even more in a sense is the idea--and this is sort of the
mentality of the market--that good price numbers now give us room to
move the discount rate down. Probably in an expectant sense they do,
but what we do with monetary policy right now, of course, won't be
reflected in prices for another couple of years. And just looking
down the road, if we find in retrospect that we are overdoing it now,

9/13/91

it seems to me that we're going to be in a very difficult environment
over the next year to take the proper steps to reverse that.
So, as I
say, I agree with 25 basis points showing through but I just want to
express my concerns, if you will, about the longer-term view.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Tom, I think you're raising an important
question. I would say were it not for the fact that we are seeing a
very significant financial contraction both on the assets side and the
liabilities side of the intermediaries, as well as in net funds
raised, I don't think we could be sufficiently confident that the
inflationary pressures are being subdued.
I don't think we are
reacting to--hopefully we aren't, at least--short-term economic events
because if the credit aggregates and money supply were on track, there
is nothing in the data that have come out in the past several days
that would strike me as reason to be taking any action. So I think
fundamentally we are responding to the financial system. And,
hopefully, we won't fall into the abyss, which we've done so many
times in the past, and which I think you correctly caution us against.
MR. MELZER.

Thank you, Alan.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
very much gentlemen.
MR. BOEHNE.

If not, thank you

When is the announcement going to be made?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

Any further comments?

Sometime before 9:30 a.m.

Thank you.
END OF SESSION

