Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
August 20, 1991
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D.C.,
PRESENT:

on Tuesday, August 20, 1991, at 9:00 a.m.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Keehn
Kelley
LaWare
Mullins
Parry

Messrs. Guffey, Hoskins, Melzer, and Syron, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, McTeer, and Stern, Presidents of
the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia,
Dallas, and Minneapolis, respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Coyne, Assistant Secretary
Gillum, Assistant Secretary
Mattingly, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, R. Davis, Lindsey,
Promisel, Scheld, Siegman, Simpson,
Slifman, and Ms. Tschinkel, Associate
Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

-2Mr. Stockton, Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs. Board of
Governors
Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, T. Davis, Hoenig, and
Rosenblum, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of St. Louis. Cleveland,
Kansas City, Kansas City, and Dallas,
respectively
Messrs. McNees, Meyer, and Miller, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia,
and Minneapolis

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
August 20, 1991
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone.
like to move the minutes of the July 2-3 meeting?
MR. BLACK.

So move.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
bring us up-to-date on the Foreign Desk?
MR. CROSS.

Would somebody

Mr. Cross, will you

[Statement--see Appendix.]

If not, would
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions for Mr. Cross?
somebody like to move to ratify the transactions as requested?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

I'll move it.

Second.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Domestic Desk.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Without objection.

Mr. Sternlight, the

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mr. Sternlight?

MR. PARRY. Peter, has the equality of the discount rate and
the federal funds rate presented any special problems or opportunities
in terms of the conduct of operations by the Desk?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
It has not presented any undue difficulty,
I anticipate that it could make for slightly more
President Parry.
And if the Committee were to adopt a
volatility in the funds rate.
course that had a lower funds rate expectation than the discount rate,
I would look even more for possible difficulty on that score. But in
the present situation, there is no particular difficulty.
MR. PARRY. Would you expect that to be a serious difficulty
in terms of complicating operations?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
the discount rate?
MR. PARRY.

If we were expecting a lower funds rate than

Yes.

MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't think it would be a terribly
I think you'd have to be reconciled to
serious problem even then.
somewhat greater fluctuation in the funds rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Other questions for Peter?
If not,
would somebody like to move to ratify the transactions of the Desk?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

Move it.

8/20/91

We now move to an
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Without objection.
issue we have discussed previously, which is alternative operating
We have considered it on innumerable occasions and we're
procedures.
revisiting it today with a memorandum from Don Kohn.
MR. KOHN. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At the last meeting
several members of the Committee requested that the staff look at
The Committee seemed to be
alternative operating procedures.
motivated by concerns about the announcement effects that we get for
each change in policy these days, and in particular in the context of
a possibility that at some point--perhaps later this year or next
year--policy would have to be firmed to keep the Committee on track
toward price stability. The Committee was sent a memo by Dave Lindsey
[See
with an attachment by Al Broaddus and a cover by myself.
Appendix.]
I'll summarize the issues very, very briefly.
In his memo, Mr. Lindsey mentions two types of related, but
potentially distinct, alterations in operating procedures. One would
involve somewhat looser targeting of the funds rate than the very
narrow targeting around a single level that has become the practice in
recent years, without necessarily any implications about how this
Allowing some ambiguity for System intentions
target is arrived at.
would tend to diffuse reactions to a change in policy partly because
it would take some time for any such change to feed through into the
market.
It would allow Peter to drain or add reserves more freely
than at present, perhaps damping some of the end-of-maintenance-period
volatility that we have now because [earlier in each maintenance
period] he is constrained [in his operations] by the level of the
It would allow demands for reserves to show
federal funds rate.
It might allow the Desk to "test the waters" with
through a bit more.
On
respect to a policy change, without necessarily committing to it.
It does risk
the other hand, ambiguity does have its disadvantages.
that the market would get the wrong idea from time to time, and that
It risks that there would be
puts extra volatility in the funds rate.
delays in having the market recognize changes that the Committee felt
desirable. And additional ambiguity risks additional calls--from
Congress, for example--for us to be much more explicit about our
operating targets.
The second strand of change in operating procedures that Dave
covered was a shift toward an operating procedure that was keyed at
least semi-automatically to changes in reserves or monetary
This would introduce a greater automatism, and the funds
aggregates.
rate would then be seen as falling out of the shifting demands for
money and reserves relative to the Fed's supply, much as in the 1979
to 1982 period. We would be seen as targeting the funds rate much
less.
The problem here is to identify something to which you want the
There were sufficient concerns
funds rate tied automatically.
expressed when we were using Ml; the Committee gave up on that because
of the volatility and changes in M1 velocity. That would seem to
throw some doubt on reserves--nonborrowed or total reserves--because
And even though M2 has
they're tied now exclusively, really, to Ml.
become a more prominent target for the Committee, there is still a lot
of doubt about the short- or even intermediate-term relationship of
movements in M2 to movements in the variables the Committee cares
about--nominal income or prices--in the short or intermediate term.
So, as you undoubtedly noticed, the staff didn't come up with any
There seem to be pros and cons
conclusions about where to shift to.

8/20/91

on all of these alternatives. I would ask whether Dave or Al has
anything to add to my summary. Dave indicates that he does not. Al?
MR. BROADDUS. I would just point out that I used the term
"reserve target" pretty loosely in my letter. What I really had in
mind is total reserve targeting--alternative 6 in Dave's memo--not
nonborrowed reserve targeting, which I think is under 4 and 5. We're
not saying that we think the case for using total reserve targeting as
a [policy] instrument has been made yet. We're simply saying we think
there's a strong case for additional research on it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Questions from the Committee?
know what to make of that long pause.
MR. ANGELL.

I don't

Do you want comments?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I started with questions, assuming
I'd get comments. Now I better ask for comments. Comments, then.
MR. ANGELL. Well, having been something of an advocate of a
different procedure, I must admit, Don, that in going through your
analysis I really don't find anything there about which I can say "I
really want to do that right now." Theoretically, I'm very much
impressed with what Al Broaddus had to say in his letter. I'm very
impressed with the notion that pegging the fed funds rate and keeping
it steady does not necessarily mean that policy is in neutral, and I
think everybody agrees with that. But the recent experience we've had
with M2 causes me to have more doubts than I have had in previous
years, and I suppose I am not quite as ready as I was four years ago
or two years ago to introduce some automatism in the program. At one
time it seemed reasonable to me that if we erred in our estimates of
the demand for money, all of the error should not show up in the money
stock and that we ought to let part of the error show up in a move in
the fed funds rate. Now, I'm still somewhat of that opinion, but I'm
not ready to advocate any of those other alternatives, Mr. Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I'm glad you gave us a chance to
take a look at this. I don't think it would surprise anyone who has
listened to what I've said that I would favor such a study. And now,
like Governor Angell, I don't know where the answer would lead; and Al
Broaddus certainly doesn't know exactly where it would lead. But I've
never really been comfortable trying to control the aggregates by
manipulating the federal funds rate because I think the demand for
money for any given level of income in the short run fluctuates too
much to do that. I have some sympathy for those alternatives that
have a degree of automatism. But I remember that when we had the
procedures in 1979-82 and we were supposed to adjust the level of
borrowed reserves by half the amount of any miss in the aggregates,
about two-thirds of the moves we made were also discretionary. So,
I'm not under any illusions that we're really about to put [policy] on
automatic pilot. But a lot of things have come along in the way of
studies on this since we last looked at it. All I would advocate is
that we use the System's considerable research resources to examine
this question because I think all of us feel some dissatisfaction with
the way we do it. But I don't believe there's anybody here who really
feels that he knows the answers as to exactly how it ought to be done.

8/20/91

It was simple in my mind when we wanted to control Ml; but it's not
simple when we're trying to control M2 and only a small fraction of M2
is reservable. And we're not paying interest on required reserves,
and that encourages further innovations. So, where this will lead, I
don't know. I suspect we probably won't get far from where we are,
but we ought to take a good hard look at it. And I think Don and Dave
have done us a good service in providing us these various
alternatives.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. In terms of the first three alternatives in
Dave's memo, allowing more fluctuation in the funds rate really
doesn't appeal to me very much. I don't think ambiguity would serve
us very well. The point about pressure on us to divulge more about
our targets if there's ambiguity about what policy is I think is a
point well taken. In terms of automatism, if you will, it doesn't
appeal to me to tie anything to M2; in other words, those fourth and
fifth alternatives don't appeal to me at all. I guess I still have
I don't think we
some affinity for looking at reserves or the base.
should write off Ml for all time. There's a possibility that in a
more stable environment in terms of inflation and inflationary
expectations M1 perhaps is going to be more meaningful. So, I would
support Al's and Bob's suggestion that we do more work on that. But I
don't think we're anywhere near being able to go to an operating
regime that targets reserves. Something that might be possible in the
short run--and this was in your summary memo, Don, not in Dave's-would be this idea of continuing to do what we do but having some
broad constraint based on some short-run aggregate that may modify
behavior as we approach the limits of that constraint. I really think
of that as a trade-off. We've talked about this concept before in the
context of the directive; when we had monetary targeting we had that
caveat in terms of funds rate fluctuations. Now we have funds rate
targeting and I think it would be quite appropriate to have some kind
of constraint in terms of aggregate behavior. But I don't think we
can look at a period as short as an intermeeting period; we've got to
look at much longer-term behavior of some reserve or monetary
aggregate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. The suggestion of introducing greater funds rate
volatility under existing operating procedures is not something that I
find very attractive. And re-establishing an inflexible borrowing
reserve target I don't find appealing at all. But it seems to me a
There
couple of the things in the papers are really quite [helpful].
are some interesting points conveyed in the examples in Dave Lindsey's
memo with regard to a greater role for deviations of M2 in affecting
our policy in the intermeeting period. I also found Al Broaddus's
arguments interesting. And in the past we've gotten some [worthwhile]
suggestions from Tom Melzer. We've done some work looking at Bennett
McCallum's monetary base procedures, which are linked to nominal
income targeting, and they seem to provide some [promising] procedures
as well. It seems to me that there are enough things of some interest
here that maybe we ought to heighten our look at possibilities.
Perhaps the System Research Advisory Committee could look at some of
these possibilities or we could even have some studies done by the
FOMC itself. There are some things here that could be useful. What

8/20/91

we're trying to do is to find an approach that is better than the
current procedure, not one that is necessarily perfect in an absolute
sense.
So, I think these papers are very useful.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, as I look back at policy over
the last couple of years, I think we've done a reasonably good job
with the present regime, so I don't feel any compelling need to make
any change, particularly at this time with all the uncertainties that
we have.
I do think that some flexibility in the funds rate is
probably desirable. And if I were pressed to do something today, I
would marginally favor the first option in the Lindsey paper. The
other thing that occurred to me is that over the time we've been
discussing this, I at least have picked up an inference--and I may be
wrong--that having some flexibility in the funds rate would somehow
protect us from political pressures when we have to move on the
[tightening] side.
I don't really buy that.
If there is that
inference, I think it's an incorrect one; we're going to get that
political pressure notwithstanding what we do with the funds rate.
I
would be interested, if it's not unduly putting Peter on the spot, to
ask whether from an operational standpoint he has any preference or,
to put it another way perhaps, if he has any problem with those first
three alternatives. Would any of those give you difficulty?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
I would welcome, I think, some greater
flexibility in the funds rate, although I recognize some of the
counter arguments that Dave's paper referred to.
But I can think of
instances where we have felt somewhat constrained by what was
happening in the funds market from doing the reserve injection or
reserve extraction that we thought ought to be done from a reserve
management standpoint.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, I would just add one final point.
I
thought Al Broaddus's letter was very interesting and I certainly
don't think we would lose anything by embarking on the kind of
research that he has indicated.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Peter, may I just follow up and ask you
what you feel are the consequences of the [funds rate constraints] on
your [operations]?
I would presume that as a consequence you end up
periodically with either a collapsing funds rate or an accelerating
funds rate on a Wednesday afternoon at the close of the maintenance
period.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
year, either way?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Several times, I would say.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

How often does that occur during the

Three or four--something like that?

Something like that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Do you sense that there are any
destabilizing occurrences as a consequence of that?

8/20/91

MR. STERNLIGHT. I don't think long term it has any really
serious impact.
If a very big, unfilled need or a very big excess
developed, it might cast its shadow over our operations in the next
reserve period and, if there had been a desire to effect some policy
I can't think
change, it conceivably could have delayed that change.
of a specific instance when that occurred, but that's the kind of
[situation] where I could imagine it having some undesirable effect.
But I don't regard it as a really serious impediment. Just from a
manager's standpoint in dealing with reserve positions, it has been a
mild or moderate frustration at times to feel that we're hemmed in by
[Laughter]
But I've gotten used to it.
the funds rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

If we're to serve [the needs of] economic
MR. HOSKINS.
policy, then we ought to have a monetary policy that is credible and
Putting more fluctuation in the funds rate doesn't
consistent.
provide the markets much information with respect to either one of
I would be in favor of trying to link the funds rate to
those goals.
a broader target like M2, but even tying ourselves to an aggregates
target without any explicit long-term objective in mind seems to me to
run the risk of introducing some uncertainty with that target as well.
So, just to follow up on what Bob Parry suggested:
Although I
wouldn't go for nominal income targeting, I would like to link the
funds rate a little more tightly to a broad aggregate like M2, but
then I would like to have a multi-year price level objective in mind
so that we don't introduce more uncertainty by focusing more on the
monetary aggregates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

I think you largely
MR. SYRON. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I'd just like to add, Peter, to the question the
asked my question.
Chairman had, and ask about how you feel in a situation in which you
believe--of course it may not be possible to forecast this--that the
constraints that you're under would have an effect upon the outcome of
I presume there are
the ultimate variables that we're worried about.
procedures that you could follow now in consultation with the Chairman
and others to deviate from a tight funds target [constraint] for a
short period of time.
But we feel that the funds
MR. STERNLIGHT. Yes, I guess so.
rate is a constraint at this time.
The reason we feel it is a
constraint is that we don't want to mislead the markets.
[Unintelligible] I presume an approach that I might develop in
consultation with Don Kohn and the Chairman.
MR. SYRON. My overall concern, as other people have said
before, is dissatisfaction with the current system--understandably so.
But life is an imperfect situation. And at least in this situation, I
see more or as much volatility or lack of stability in the financial
sector as in the real sector. That makes me concerned about doing
anything in the short- to intermediate-run to change the approach that
we're taking. I completely agree with the concerns that people have
about the lack of desirability of introducing greater ambiguity.
I appreciate the
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments?
[difficulty] of trying to [develop] a study that approaches this

8/20/91

question.
If I knew all the things we were to study that we don't
know--.
I'd be curious to ask Don and David:
Is there any
significant, unexplored statistical or analytical area from which we
might focus on this issue that would be a productive use of the
resources of the System?
MR. LINDSEY. Well, I think you could answer "yes" to that
question without the results of that research necessarily having any
I think Al's
implications for a change in FOMC operating procedures.
letter raised some interesting research issues that ought to be given
more attention by the staff of the nation's central bank. But I guess
in my own mind we have a sufficiently close handle on the Committee's
desires and on the relationships at work that it wouldn't imply,
therefore, that the Committee ought to alter its operating procedures.
On the other hand, I would support--this is my personal opinion and Al
and Don may disagree--additional research, which to some degree is
But
ongoing in any event. We could add a bit more emphasis to it.
I'm not sure in my own mind, whatever the results of that work within
reasonable boundaries, that it would have any real implications for
our operating procedures.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Al.

It seems to
MR. BROADDUS. Well, I don't disagree with that.
me that there is enough room for long-term improvement in the way we
I
do things to at least do a substantial research project on this.
don't think we really know how a total reserves operating procedure
would work. We would have to study that in the context of the overall
strategy and situation. We'd have to ask questions like what would we
tie that instrument to in the way of the longer-term goal and whether
we should still have intermediate targets. But it seems to me there's
enough out there that we need to understand to justify a fairly
focused research effort within the System. And I think we have the
resources in the System as a whole to do that.
I think what I'm
MR. KOHN. I agree with both Al and Dave.
hearing from the Committee is no sense of urgency for coming up with
something new, partly because of the skepticism Dave expressed as to
whether there really is something new out there that would solve our
problems or appreciably [lessen] the difficulty we see with the
What I was going to suggest, Mr. Chairman, is
current procedures.
that I consult with Al and other research directors around the room to
see whether we could at least have some ongoing research on these
issues.
The McCallum research on targeting the base, which keeps
popping up in every conference I go to, for example, and some of these
other things are areas in which the System ought to be doing work. It
doesn't mean that something has to be done by the next FOMC meeting.
We ought to be able to focus our resources in a way that at least
answers some of the outstanding questions or approaches.
I think that
would be the right thing for the central bank to be doing.
MR. BLACK. One of the big reasons reserve targeting has been
opposed in the past has been the feeling that it would cause more
fluctuations in short-term interest rates. And as Al indicates in his
letter, there is some evidence now that that might not be the case for
long-term rates.
That could be an important factor, I think.

8/20/91

I think we're all acutely aware that
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
holding steady with the funds rate is not the same as a stable
monetary policy. Even though we focus on that as an instrument, I
don't think there's anyone around this table who believes that a flat
funds rate is equal to a stable monetary policy.
MR. BLACK. It's awfully hard, even if you know what you want
to accomplish, to pick the [appropriate] fed funds rate.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
So, it may not be a bad idea to expand
It may not be directly usable but I
our insights into this area.
think if we learn something, the payoff is very large.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, that gets back to a thought that I had
It's not clear in my mind what you mean about
when Dave was speaking.
research. It seems to me that we've done a lot of research; more can
be done. Are you getting at the idea that the problem of implementing
some of those research findings has more to do with the Committee's
view about multiple objectives rather than focusing on a single
objective?
Are you saying that we have some research to date-MR. LINDSEY. Well, I wouldn't draw as tight a link as you
did between many or only one ultimate target and the procedures for
intermediate targeting and operating targets that might get us there.
I think one could essentially have the Neal resolution passed, have
price stability as our ultimate objective--period, and still end up
through a deliberative process deciding that our current operating
procedure is probably the most sensible way to get there. So, even if
there were a clear decision to move to price stability with no ifs,
ands, or buts, there would still be these issues as to whether or not
the way to get there is more or less doing what we're doing now but
with that end in mind.
MR. BROADDUS.

Could I just--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Go ahead, Al.

MR. BROADDUS.
There is some evidence that that might not be
We may well wind up there, Dave. But there are at least
the case.
some models that suggest that long-run price stability simply may not
be consistent with the procedure we're using now.
MR. LINDSEY. Well, it's true that if you're not taking
seriously that long-run objective, then you're not going to get to
price stability. Lee wouldn't disagree with that.
MR. HOSKINS.

That's right.

On the other hand, if you are taking that
MR. LINDSEY.
seriously, I'm confident that you could move the funds rate in a
manner over time that would get you there.
I think it would be useful in this second stage
MR. MULLINS.
of research to define the problem pretty carefully in terms of what
It is true that everyone recognizes a stable
we're trying to achieve.
funds rate is not a stable monetary policy. What has been difficult
to convince people of is that a change in the federal funds rate may
be an unchanged monetary policy. That is a bit more difficult.

8/20/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. MULLINS.

It logically follows the first.

Yes, everyone buys the first.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the second is directly derivable
from the first; it should not be difficult to convince-MR. MULLINS. We haven't been able to write QED after the
second one.
It does seem to me that we also lose some information
when we don't allow markets, in some range, to tighten and loosen on
their own. So, part of the research should be to think about, at a
very practical level, how we've achieved what we think is a mistake
now. I feel pretty uncomfortable picking a fed funds rate out of the
dark and also with this process of two types of changes in the fed
funds rate, one being a change in policy and the other not being a
change in policy. With that narrow sort of definition of the problem
as well as the broader definition of the policy of [unintelligible]
the question of reserve targeting and targeting to price levels at a
broader objective level.
MR. ANGELL. Well, when David Lindsey speaks about the
present procedures, I think he's correct that none of us really had in
mind a year ago that we wanted to get the fed funds rate to 5-1/2
percent. No one really seems to have in mind the fed funds rate that
What has been driving us in a sense has been a kind of
is driving us.
feeling our way in all of the procedures [on the basis of] all of the
information that we have; and we find ourselves with a 5-1/2 percent
fed funds rate. So, I don't think that the [current] procedure
necessarily means that we're really hooking on to some predetermined
fed funds rate. I think in a way many of us are surprised to find
ourselves at this juncture with a fed funds rate of 5-1/2 percent.
And since we're surprised, then it must be that we have considerations
that are driving us other than the fed funds rate.
MR. BLACK. You'd be surprised as to what the aggregates are
doing with that particular fed funds rate, which we thought would be
something very different.
MR. KELLEY.
MR. BLACK.

That's right.
And therein lies our frustration, I think.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But in a sense, therein lies what policy
is all about.
It is, in effect, what we have endeavored to do just to
balance two--in fact, a lot more than two--variations from our
intermediate expectations.
Any other comments?
If not, unless I hear
any objections, I assume that Don's suggestion probably does capture
the general tenor of this discussion and I would ask him to go forward
with that.
And we shall wish him well, because I'm not sure what--.
[Laughter]
MR. ANGELL. And there may be Federal Reserve Bank research
departments that might wish to take on some additional tasks relating
to what has been done at the Board.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what we intend.

8/20/91

-10-

MR. KOHN. Well, I would intend to coordinate with Al and
other research directors.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Another round.

MR. KOHN. I didn't intend to make it just a Board staff
[Laughter]
project at all--as little as possible!
Shall we move on then? Another
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay.
item that has come up previously and was deferred to a study relates
This
to the directive language concerning intermeeting adjustments.
is an issue that Governor Kelley has raised and he in conjunction with
[See Appendix.]
Governor,
Don Kohn has brought forth a memorandum.
would you like to chair us through this?
MR. KELLEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. When you say that a
study has been done on this subject, that's giving it much too much
credit. We haven't done a study but-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You have given it some thought.

MR. KELLEY. Yes, some thought. As I indicated to you in my
memo of May 20, it seems to me that the Committee might well review
the language that we employ in the operational paragraph wherein we
indicate the areas of concern--theoretically, in rank order. That
order has not changed now for 38 months, and certainly [the economic]
conditions and the nature of the discussions that have taken place
To
around this table have changed over the course of that period.
We established that language on June
refresh the Committee's memory:
30, 1988--or at least we established that rank order of
Since that time there
considerations; the rhetoric has changed some.
have been 5 tightening moves, 1 discount rate move in an upward
direction when we went to 7 percent in February of '89, and the
We reversed direction
directives have had 6 tilts toward tightness.
in June of 1989 and since then there have been 17 easing moves, 3
discount rates changes in the direction of ease, and 9 directives that
tilted toward ease. And sprinkled throughout that whole period in
both the upward and downward direction, there have been 9 symmetric
directives. So, a lot of water has passed under the bridge while
And it appears to me that we may want to
nothing has changed here.
take a look at that.
In my view, either alternative 1 or alternative 3 in my memo
would be preferable to what seems to be our current practice, which is
I think [the current practice] is
simply not actively managing it.
probably viable because it has become pretty much meaningless, but
If we don't feel
it's not very desirable for exactly the same reason.
that we want to manage that language actively--or more positively, if
we decide that it's simply not very useful any more--then I think we
should consider dropping it, or changing the rhetoric perhaps, or
employing Don Kohn's additional thought that appears as number 4 in
The latter would change the
his memo, which I appreciate having.
recitation of the factors; it would keep them in there but blur their
order of presentation.
For what it's worth, I think that active management of that
I know in my own case it's a useful pre-meeting
language is useful.
It seems to me that for the
discipline to think through that.

8/20/91

-11-

historical record of the activity of this Committee it has real value.
So, I personally would like to see us keep it and come up with a
system where we review it in a way that will keep it fresh and current
but still not be an undue burden on the Committee. I would appreciate
very much having some other members' thoughts. I'd like to ask Don
Kohn first of all if he'd like to add anything.
MR. KOHN. I don't have anything to add to what you said.
Obviously, we would try to be helpful and come up with suggestions for
implementing whatever the Committee decided it wanted to do.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions?

MR. HOSKINS. I think there's some merit in focusing on our
longer-term objective right up front and consistently saying what it
is. The question is whether we can agree on it.
I guess we can as
long as we don't put a time frame around it. If we start to say we're
going to do it in three years or five years, then I think disagreement
will arise. But I think highlighting that as the major policy thrust
over time is important.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'd just like to add that it doesn't
necessarily follow that holding that list of objectives constant
through that period of ups and downs is necessarily a contradiction.
MR. KELLEY.

No, absolutely.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can create that type of phenomenon.
The issue is:
Does that occur consciously or has it just become a
mantra of some kind for us.
MR. KELLEY. Well, one rationale by which it could have been
actively kept that way is for this Committee to have decided that it
permanently wants to keep absolutely preeminent under any conditions
this focus on price level stability. And if that's what we want to
do, then to me there is a better way to express it rather than to
continue to imply that there's a rank order and that somehow or other
price stability inevitably comes first. We can do it in a different
way and still make due allowance for that price level stability
preeminence to be expressed.
MR. ANGELL. You mean have a separate sentence that indicates
our commitment to price level stability?
MR. KELLEY.

Yes, and then deal with the others.

MR. ANGELL. And then deal with the others.
there's certainly some merit in that approach.

Well, I think

MR. KOHN. Governor Angell, there is a sentence already in
the directive. If you look on the last page of the package with
Governor Kelley's memo, there is a copy of the July meeting's
directive. The first sentence at the top of the page that precedes
the discussion of the long-run ranges does, in effect, do that. We
could change the wording of that sentence.
MR. ANGELL.

What sentence are you talking about, Don?

8/20/91

-12-

MR. KOHN.
"The Federal Open Market Committee seeks monetary
and financial conditions that will foster price stability and promote
sustainable growth in output."
It's page 2 of the directive.
MR. KELLEY.
talking about.

Right.

It's one paragraph up from the one I'm

MR. KOHN. Now, we could play with that. The issue is how
the intermeeting directive fits into those already stated goals.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. To pick up on a point that you made,
Mr. Chairman, I'm not inherently troubled by the fact that the rank
order stayed the same over this whole period, despite Mike's clever
recitation of all that took place in that period. On the other hand,
if you look at this table, there are at least a few cases in which the
change in the rank order did mean something. For example, around the
time of the stock market crash in October 1987, there's no question
that that change really meant something. Whatever we do, I think we
have to preserve some flexibility to take account of things like that.
On the other hand, I fear that if we got into the practice of managing
the rank order as part of the normal deliberative process of the
For example,
Committee, it could be disruptive to the policy process.
I think it would be terrible if we ended up with a situation in which
the Committee couldn't reach a reasonable conclusion about the thrust
of policy because of a great debate as to what should be number two
versus what should be number three or number four versus number two.
If we were going to move in the direction of what Mike Kelley has
characterized as an active management of the rank order, the only way
I can see that that can be done without running the risk of disrupting
the normal consensus-building process within the Committee would be in
a context in which there would be a consensus on that point after the
The thought of
policy directive itself had already been voted on.
inviting dissents over what is number three versus number two I think
could be very disruptive.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, the problem there is that just
procedurally, if you have, let's say, a list of five items and a
Committee this large to make a judgment, the time frame required to
solve that matrix--

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's my point.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. --goes way beyond lunch, dinner, and
whatever else. One possibility is that we can alter this list in a
very generic way once a year or something of that nature as we do the
monetary aggregates when we're looking at them in a sense as a
separate policy orientation for the period ahead rather than at every
meeting. Were we to do that, we could actually do that almost
independently of the deliberation process of a specific directive in
I'm not certain that we
the same way that we do the monetary targets.
need to change these every meeting. But I do think that we should
either freeze them permanently--meaning that this is the Committee's
formal set of objectives in the order of our priorities, which is
invariant to specific economic conditions that we're confronting--or
have some greater flexibility where they might change over a period of
time or in cases where there was a very specific indication such as

8/20/91

-13-

the stock market crash or, as we'll be discussing later, this very
[In the latter
peculiar M2 problem that we're running up against.
case] there are potential recommendations to alter the directive with
that characteristic being in a sense a specific short-term type of
adjustment for a specific meeting. I don't know how that strikes you,
Governor Kelley, as a recommendation; it sort of comes to grips with
the problem you raised but hopefully doesn't get into the problem that
Jerry Corrigan raised.
It may
MR. KELLEY.
I totally agree with Jerry's concern.
indeed be insurmountable and, thus, we may want to look in other
directions.
I would have no problem going in your direction, and I
And
think that Don's [proposed] change could be a way to get at that.
if we have another event of the magnitude of October '87, we can
change the language on that occasion.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I like that suggestion. If we
were to do that, say, at the December meeting, that would be a "goals"
meeting, which could then precede our establishment of the ranges at
the February meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

As part of the discussion?

MR. ANGELL. As part of the discussion. But I think we
should leave open the opportunity for some intra-year moves that might
take place when events occur during the year.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I guess I'm not as enthusiastic about that
suggestion.
It seems to me that an approach that would solve our
problems and in addition enable us to highlight things that we think
are important when important events occur is what Don indicated in
4.b. on page 3 and a slight variation of 4.c. on page 4. That does
involve repeating the long-term objectives, but it states them there
and then just indicates the kinds of things we want to put in at a
If we don't go through
meeting that are of particular importance.
each meeting ordering the four or five elements, this just focuses on
To me this has
things that at that particular meeting were important.
the flexibility and also the emphasis on the longer term, and I think
it's very constructive and preferable to what we have.
MR. BLACK. Well, I think Governor Kelley has done us a real
I've been uncomfortable for a
service in pointing these things out.
long time with the way we've handled this thing. And even though we
ourselves don't pay much attention to this, the Fed watchers do pay a
lot of attention to it and they think it's an indication of our
practice.
More importantly, if we do change them, they think that
So, if we continue doing that,
means we've changed our emphasis.
there's a strong argument for doing what is almost the unthinkable, as
you and Jerry have pointed out, of debating this and maybe reaching an
impasse at every meeting. So, I've concluded that what I think you
are all moving toward is that we should eliminate this language and
Changing this list, even infrequently, tends to
take another route.
promote the perception already held by many that we are constantly
changing our objectives and we're trading off one objective against
the other. And I don't think considering the list at each meeting
would add anything to our policy deliberations; that could hamper us,

-14-

8/20/91

as Don pointed out, and you and Jerry also have mentioned. So, my
preference would be to adopt what is Governor Kelley's point 3 and
Don's example under 4. Don gives three examples and I like the one
labeled 4.b., which is at the bottom of page 3 in his memo, because it
puts long-run price stability at the head of the list. And needless
to say, I'd want to retain the reference to the aggregates because
right now I think that is the best route to get to long-term price
stability, although our views may change as a result of this study we
talked about earlier. But adherence to that approach doesn't
necessarily bind us to that every time.
If we have a particular
situation like we have now, with extreme weakness in the aggregates
for some unexplainable reason, or like the stock market crash in
October of 1987, then we could certainly change it.
But I would like
to start off with saying something about price stability. As Don
pointed out, there is such a reference in the previous paragraph, but
I don't think it would hurt to put it at the beginning of the
operational paragraph too and make it a generic reference. I would
very much favor doing that.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. The more I listen to this discussion, the more I
think that maybe we ought to do away with this listing. That's partly
because the table presented in Governor Kelley's memo reminded me that
I've seen that table in certain research where people try to figure
out what the Fed is doing. That sort of scares me because, as Jerry
pointed out, sometimes we consciously change [the items in the list]
and sometimes we don't think about them at all.
And it seems to me
the purpose of that language is really guidance to you, Mr. Chairman,
and to the Desk in the intermeeting period.
I personally have
confidence in your having listened to the discussion in the meeting
and in your interpretation of that, and I'm not sure you need that
guidance. And I'm not sure that guidance adds any value to public
[understanding], really. These are sort of boiler plate things that
any central bank is going to take into account in setting policy.
So,
I'd be in favor of doing away with that recitation myself.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I think Tom raised an interesting point.
If
you look at the context here, this is not a recitation of long-term
goals; it is the implementation of policy for the immediate future--in
the intermeeting period--that we are focusing on.
And that's why it's
so useful to have the flexibility to signal that there's a near-term
concern like the stock market or, if the dollar should collapse, that
That's a fairly
in the near term there is special emphasis on that.
rare circumstance, but it's nice to have a device already in place to
deal with it.
In thinking of what to do in default when we don't have
that, I like the notion of considering it once a year with the targets
to establish what sorts of things we look at in the intermeeting
period in normal times. But I think we'd have less flexibility if we
didn't have language here to guide the intermeeting period focus; and
then when we have one of these events, it's a more jarring change
somehow just to interject exchange rates or credit market conditions
and the like [in the directive].
So, I guess I would prefer having a
standard list that we would consider for the next year, i.e. what
Price stability
would be the kind of default issues we would look at.
would be number one, but we then also have there the mechanism for

8/20/91

-15-

signaling concerns.
It is different, though, than the longer-term
objectives because we're really talking about what we might focus on
in the immediate future.
MR. MELZER. Dave, wouldn't you think the policy record would
reveal that, though?
Wouldn't it reveal our particular concern
without restating that in the operational paragraph of the directive?
That was my main point.
MR. MULLINS. Yes, we could just write it out.
I think it
might be useful first to state what in normal times are the issues
that we look at, and this would be a nice simple concise way.
If we
had a clearly conceptualized approach to this, it wouldn't bother me
if this showed up in tables.
I think it's a concern if it shows up in
Fed watchers' tables when we aren't focusing on it and don't have it
clear in a gut sense.
MR. MELZER.

Yes.

MR. KELLEY.

That's it.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, along with what everyone has said,
I think we have to be careful not to try to send too many messages to
the market.
We're having people see three messages, perhaps, for
every one we're trying to send.
In that regard [I like] your
suggestion for [reviewing this] once a year. And I think David
[Mullins] is absolutely right that we want to retain it and make it an
extraordinary event to some extent when we change these things.
In
what we present in a once-a-year approach such as you suggested it is
important that we get in there that while we're focusing on price
stability, we're focusing on price stability for a reason. And that
reason is that it's not an objective by itself; it's an objective in
order to maximize real economic welfare.
Sometimes--fortunately not
in this group but outside--there can be some confusion about that.
MR. HOSKINS.
I think we're trying to serve two purposes
here.
One is to provide information. And the second is procedural:
to help us conduct our policy affairs and make sure we're getting
things right.
Where I come out on the information question is that
there's not much informational content because what these five or six
factors that we list tell people is that we have multiple objectives.
We can say price stability and long-term economic growth until we're
blue in the face; but if we list those, we're signaling to the market
that those things are important to us and we'll shift them around when
we feel like it.
I don't like the list personally because I don't
think half of the items should be in there. So, I'd go essentially
for Bob Black's and Tom Melzer's suggestion and reduce the list.
I
guess that's 4.b. on page 3 of Don's memo.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Any further comments?

MR. BLACK. I think this point bears on the one that you
raised earlier about our not thinking of a change in the federal funds
rate as a change in policy and yet the market, or most of the market,
does.
If we had this overall summary statement as in Don's example
4.b. on page 3:
"In the context of the Committee's long-run

8/20/91

-16-

objectives for price stability and sustainable economic growth,

somewhat greater reserve restraint..." then we can go into these
things. But we have said that that is in our judgment compatible with
our long-run objective and I think it would reduce the tendency of the
public to think of that as a change in policy when it really isn't.
That's one of the main reasons I lean toward a reserve base measure
because if we had that, we could have interest rates go this way or
that way and we wouldn't have any better idea as to which way they
would go than anybody else. I don't know if they would tend to be
interpreted that way, but it is just the natural fallout of trying to
seek a long-run objective; it may involve lower rates or it may
involve higher rates, and that can change all over the place from time
to time.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further comments?
It strikes me
that we've made considerable progress on the issue that you've raised,
but we haven't resolved it yet. If I may, Governor Kelley, I would
request that for the next meeting if you could perhaps get views in
somewhat greater detail from all the Committee members and the
nonvoting presidents, you may find that there is a much more solid
consensus than may appear here. But I think there was a growing view
somewhat in your direction on this question. If you can query
everyone with respect to their specific suggestions, you may be able
to bring before us at the next meeting something capturing this
discussion with alternative recommendations. Clearly, item 4.b. is
one alternative; the one that I mentioned is another; and there may be
a third, or something else you can come up with. Get it down to two
or three specific things and we may be able to resolve the issue at
the next meeting. So, if you wouldn't mind, I'd-MR. KELLEY. I'd be happy to do that, Mr. Chairman. My sense
is that there is a large common core of thought here among Committee
members as to whether to do this, although there probably are nuances
from every seat around the table. We'll come back with some proposed
alternatives.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
completely.
MR. KELLEY.

Sure.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

One possibility being to eliminate it

Or change it to something different.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. We're now up to [our review of]
the economic situation. Mike Prell.
MR. PRELL.

Statement--see Appendix.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Questions for Mike?

MR. MULLINS. Where do we stand on our inventory scenario?
What happened in the second quarter and what do you think is happening
now?
MR. PRELL. Well, what happened in the second quarter was
clearly a liquidation of stocks in the nonfarm business sector. We

8/20/91

-17-

believe on the basis of the data that came in after BEA's advance
estimate that that liquidation will be, in all likelihood, deeper in
the revised numbers but perhaps still not quite as sharp as we had
anticipated in our June Greenbook forecast. Looking ahead, while one
can see in the June data--if one wants to read them very closely--some
hints of a diminished rate of liquidation, basically our view is that,
in light of the anecdotal evidence and our anticipations of what
behavior would be at this point, we are probably still in a phase of
inventory liquidation but at a slower pace than earlier. And probably
we are not swinging toward stability or accumulation quite as rapidly
as we had thought we might be in our prior forecast. As I indicated,
businessmen just seem to be very cautious and not at all confident
that the recovery and the demand are there and will remain there. So,
I think this process is likely to be stretched out some relative to
our earlier forecast.
MR. MULLINS. You have in the Greenbook for the second
quarter a negative $21 billion [for inventories].
What was in the
advance number--negative $16 billion or something?
MR. PRELL. What is in the Greenbook is the BEA number. We
think we're likely to have several billion dollars less inventory
investment.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Are there any biases in the inventory
change numbers as a consequence of the [change in the] price base? In
other words, do real inventory levels change or will they be
significantly altered with the move to 1987 prices in the November
base revision?
MR. PRELL. I would think that oil would be the major item of
inventory that would be significantly affected, but obviously other
items could be affected to a lesser degree.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Do we know the direction of the effect?

MR. PRELL. I have not seen estimates and I don't think we
are able to replicate those estimates at that level of disaggregation;
we could not really pin that down.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. One of the things about which there
could be a concern is that we are viewing the outlook in the context
of a set of homogenous goods--units from which we interpret there is
liquidation of a certain dimension--and it could conceivably turn out
that a goodly part of our presumption is wholly the result of the
arbitrary choice of a price base.
MR. PRELL. Well, there are always risks that the inventory
numbers could be significantly revised. History provides very
discomforting examples of this kind of thing. The evidence--in terms
of surveys and in terms of what we see going on in industrial
production and orders and so on--is consistent with our impression
that, indeed, inventories have continued to be liquidated. But the
dimensions are important here. So, if there are errors in these
numbers, they could be misleading us.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I would suspect that the forthcoming
durable goods order series is quite crucial to this in the sense that

-18-

8/20/91

if the rate of liquidation is what it appears to be, that figure
should be moving up, not sideways or down.
MR. PRELL. We would like to see firmer numbers than the June
figure. The June figure wasn't particularly a surprise, in a
statistical sense, coming after the pretty good gains we had seen in
At this stage of what we think is a recovery,
the prior months.
erratic movements without a clear-cut, month-by-month upward thrust
are not uncommon. But, as I said, the major areas in which we became
somewhat more insecure were how rapidly the inventory turnaround would
I'd
occur and how much spending on business equipment would improve.
say those figures will be of considerable interest.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. The assumption made in the forecast with regard
Is that an exogenous
to the dollar is that it remains constant.
And if it is, what, for example, would the MPS model
determination?
give for the dollar and what would be its implications?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, viewing the forecast as a whole, it is not
It is
an assumption that is part of the projection process.
endogenous to our outlook for interest rates here, which is where we
start from, our outlook for interest rates abroad, and what else is
The MPS model has a slightly different
going on in the forecast.
exchange rate equation than most others, none of which does very well
Basically, since the forecast for interest rates is flat
these days.
here and flat abroad, the unchanged dollar, at least [to the extent it
To the extent
is] driven by interest rates, is consistent with that.
that one wants to add in some view of what is happening in the current
account, which some other equations do--that's a feature that has
tended to do very poorly in the models recently--the fact is that the
It is quite
current account is continuing to be in the negative.
modest, at least taking the judgmental forecast. Again, I don't think
you can find any particular downward pressure on the dollar from that.
Just to clarify something stemming from an
MR. PRELL.
Our guess is--just reading
earlier question from Governor Mullins:
the data that we can see on manufacturing and retail/wholesale trade-that the inventory liquidation that was put at $3 billion in the
initial GNP estimate will be more like $11 billion. So, it's a
significant change.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Say that again, Mike.

MR. PRELL. We think that the manufacturing and retail and
wholesale trade data imply a downward revision of roughly $8 billion
in the inventory accumulation rate in the second quarter.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any further questions for Mike?
would somebody like to start the Committee discussion?

If not,

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, we have been forecasting a modest
recovery and it seems to me that at best that's what it seems we have
been getting. Our forecast has been a little weaker than the staff
forecast and with the passage of time I'm afraid the difference seems
to have narrowed.

8/20/91

-19-

With regard to the District, I think overall conditions are
continuing to show improvement, but certainly this unevenness
continues.
The auto sector remains the key uncertainty, with the

change in models. Recent sales trends have been encouraging at least
but still far from strong, and the numbers are really confused by
fleet sales.
It's very difficult to get at those numbers and really
determine just what the underlying retail demand for cars is.
The '92
models have been introduced and the introduction hasn't gone quite as
well as had been generally hoped.
Indeed, attitudes in our District
are a little more negative than just a month ago.
In fact, one
manufacturer is concerned enough about the way the '92 sales are going
that they are going to put out a nationwide sales pitch of an
unprecedented level in September.
Having said that, the retail dealer
inventory is very low; no correction there is necessary. But despite

that, the production risks, looking at the third and fourth quarters,
are still viewed as being on the down side. Of course, the three main
domestic manufacturers are reporting big losses. And heavy truck
numbers continue to be very weak; sales forecasts for '91 are
estimated at about 90,000 units for the Class A trucks and that's down
some 25 percent from 1990, which itself was a weak year. The
recreation vehicle business, which is very important--particularly to
Indiana--also is pretty weak. That business continues in a three-year
slump now; [it's down] as much as 25 percent for some individual
manufacturers. The steel business, though, is doing a bit better.
Those manufacturers supplying the auto industry are operating at a
slightly better level; 80 percent of capacity is the overall industry
average. And the current level of orders is responding to the slight
pickup in car production; the current level of orders of those
supplying the auto industry is at about 150 percent of capacity, but
they do caution that those steel orders are subject to cancellation.
Nonetheless, they are forecasting for this year shipments of about 76
million tons and the initial forecast for '92 is 82 million tons.
In the agricultural sector, the drought, as I commented the
last time, is beginning to have some negative effect on the outlook
for crop production. So far it's not nearly as severe as the 1988
drought, and we do not expect this to move into the banking sector and
cause the kind of problems that we had before. Nonetheless, in terms
of our District--and I think we are perhaps a bit more impacted by the
drought than some other parts of the country--corn production will be
down about 15 percent from last year and soybean production will be
down about 4 percent. But because the drought conditions are recent,
prices haven't risen as much as one might expect and, therefore, farm
income will be adversely affected. That is beginning to show up in
the weakness of sales of agricultural equipment, and the main
manufacturers of ag equipment are beginning to pull back their
production schedules for the remainder of this year.
On the inflation front, I must say I continue to be impressed
--really almost surprised--by the very, very heavy and continuing
pressure on prices. Competitive conditions out there are very intense
and price increases at least from a [unintelligible] just aren't
sticking. Manufacturers are able to get a [price] reduction on their
purchases of raw materials and other parts and products. Some of the
reductions really are quite impressive, so they've got a very good
control on their costs. Offsetting this, and Mike alluded to it,
there has been some recent shift in labor contracts; some of the more
recent contracts are not coming in quite as favorably as they were

8/20/91

-20-

earlier in the year.
I would point out that Deere and Caterpillar are
just starting their negotiations.
These are very important contracts.
And certainly, the caps in their discussions particularly are starting
off badly. They can't even agree on the sites where they're going to
hold the negotiations.
With regard to the credit crunch--and I must say here I'm
certainly speaking from a Midwestern perspective--the problem, at
least in our part of the country, doesn't seem to be as bad as in
other regions.
I think there is a slight shift taking place.
Though
banks have raised and continue to have pretty high credit standards,
for those companies and borrowers that do meet these standards there's
plenty of credit available. A CEO of one large regional bank told me
the other day that for any good credit that goes on the table, five
banks are coming after it pretty quickly.
In the consumer credit
area--and we do have a director who follows consumer activities pretty
closely--I must say the level of personal bankruptcies is getting a
little worrisome. The numbers are up very significantly this year
over last year. And this seems to be showing up in increased
delinquencies in [banks'] consumer portfolios.
The recovery still seems to be on track but it's certainly
modest and uneven and very, very susceptible to shocks such as what we
experienced over the weekend.
From a policy perspective, continuing
ease is the best policy to facilitate the continued recovery and seems
to me an appropriate course of action. Thank you.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Following weak activity
in recent months, the Twelfth District economy shows few signs of
California's economy, which contracted
recovery at the present time.
somewhat less than the nation's throughout most of the recession,
remains sluggish. Payroll employment has been flat since March;
manufacturing and construction employment continue to contract and
cutbacks planned for state and local government sectors are expected
to weaken employment further.
I might also add that we're likely to
see greater weakness in the aerospace industry primarily located in
If you look outside California, the
southern California as well.
States such as Washington, Oregon,
conditions are really quite mixed.
and Nevada have experienced employment declines in recent months and
that's a bit of a change from what their experience had been a few
months ago.
Also, as in California, the weakness in their employment
has been primarily in construction and manufacturing. Three states-Idaho, Utah, and Arizona--remain relatively strong, with rather
Nonresidential construction is
impressive increases in employment.
obviously quite weak; residential real estate construction is showing
some signs of recovery.
Sales activity and median prices are above
their year-ago levels in California and in the West in general.
Permits for new construction are up as are housing starts, at least
for the month of June. This renewed activity, however, has yet to be
reflected in increased construction employment, and we do have quite a
I might
few builders reporting difficulty in [obtaining] financing.
note that the banks in general seem to be talking much more about
difficulties they are having with the examination process and the
impact that is likely to have on their lending decisions. I might
also point out that it seems to me reasonable to assume--and this was
alluded to in the Bluebook--that given some of the major mergers

8/20/91

-21-

throughout the country and particularly the one in our District, it's
likely that the enthusiasm with which these banks approach new and
existing business in the six-month period when they're putting
together their mergers will be considerably less.
If I can turn to the national outlook, our forecast is not
greatly different from that in the Greenbook, if one assumes that the
value of the dollar remains constant.
I think that is a critical
In the near term I would assume that the main sources of
assumption.
the strength in the economy would be household outlays on such things
as durable goods and also housing. Next year perhaps we can look
forward to something of a turnaround in business spending for
equipment.
Obviously in this forecast, as has been mentioned by many
others and certainly by Mike Prell, there are both downside and upside
risks.
Clearly, the recent slowdown in M2 and concerns about
financial fragility do raise the prospect and the risk that the
recovery could turn out to be less than that in the Greenbook. But I
also have to take into account the chance of a more typical postIt wouldn't be the first time that
recession pickup in expenditures.
we've been surprised by the strength of the recovery. While I'm
optimistic about inflation and I think it will decline over the next
year and a half, the recent behavior of wage costs is certainly a
concern. And those concerns were adequately expressed in the
Greenbook.
I might note in closing that we do have a model forecast
where the dollar is treated endogenously. In light of what has
happened in the last 48 hours, the discussion of a lower dollar
doesn't seem as relevant. But that forecast includes the possibility
of the dollar declining between now and the end of next year at a rate
The impact on real growth in 1992 is very
of about 15 percent.
substantial; it adds more than a percent to growth and adds about 0.3
I have to admit that I am more comfortable
of a percent to inflation.
with the assumption of a constant dollar, but most of the models I've
looked at have a tendency to cause the dollar to decline somewhat.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President McTeer.

MR. MCTEER.
The Eleventh District continues to lag the
national economy. Therefore, it has weakened since the last meeting
and is probably a drag on the national recovery at this point except
that one source of Eleventh District weakness, which is low natural
gas prices, is probably helping the national economy somewhat.
Another source of weakness locally is the slowing in the building of
Geographically, the
petro-chemical plants in the Gulf Coast region.
Houston area has accounted for 40 to 50 percent of the job growth in
the last year or so and that has now stagnated somewhat.
Turning to our view of the national economy, the staff is not
too worried about a double-dip, based on their review of past doubleThey find that inventory
dips and the characteristics they had.
explanations are largely present that are not relevant now. Also,
they expect net exports to gain strength and there have been five
consecutive months now of a rising index of leading economic
indicators. Recession in that context is fairly unprecedented.
The
staff is not as worried as I am about the recent decline in the
broader measures of the money supply. They tend to view it as a
fairly benign disintermediation process away from depositories into
stocks, bonds, and other types of instruments. But I do believe it's
important to get money back on track, regardless of the explanation

-22-

8/20/91

for the slowdown and the decline. And in the context of the previous
discussion, I believe that the will to do so is more important than
the way or the method to do it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we're very, very close to the
staff, as we usually are, and maybe even closer this time than
ordinarily. We'd be very happy if we got the outcome that they think
is most likely, but from the standpoint of policy the relevant
question is where the risks lie. I think the staff concludes as we do
that the risks probably are on the down side, when you think about the
insurance problems--and now we have the casualty insurance companies
hit by hurricane Bob--the so-called credit crunch, and the weakness in
the aggregates. We ought to keep in mind some other things, too.
There's always doubt when you're in a recession as to what it is
I remember that in every single
that's going to take you out of it.
one we've had. Mike just enumerated three major factors that had
caused the staff to think that maybe this forecast ought to be revised
slightly upward: the behavior of consumer expenditures, residential
construction, and net exports. The thing that worries us most of all,
I think, is the behavior of payroll unemployment and employment. We
went back and looked at the behavior of this for all the postwar
upturns in the first three months following a trough. If you look at
that and compare the first estimate that we have now for the last
month, it really doesn't look very different from what we've had in
the other postwar upturns except in one case. So, this may not be
quite as alarming as it looks on the surface. With these things in
mind, I don't think it's time yet to push the panic button. But I
think we have to be very, very alert to the risk to the near-term
outlook that is being posed by the behavior of the aggregates since we
simply can't explain by econometric models or otherwise all of this
weakness that we've seen in them. And that makes me worry somewhat
that monetary policy could have been tighter than we really meant it
to be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Syron.

MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, as to the situation in New England,
there certainly isn't anything new to report, at least of a favorable
[nature].
Talking to directors and businessmen more broadly, there's
an increased sense of pessimism that is definitely palpable and a
feeling that the region is still deteriorating. While the pace of the
decline may be abating, there's certainly no sense of an upturn. The
only bright spot for now is continued activity generated by mortgage
rates and existing home sales and also by [housing] price adjustments.
There is some slight improvement in new home construction. Given the
inventory overload that we have, particularly in the condo market, it
is going to be very interesting to find out just how many waterside
condominiums were fully damaged by the hurricane that went through! I
think the insurance industry inspectors should be quite careful [in
determining] just what did cause the damage.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The only problem with that is that
then the burden is on all your insurance companies.
MR. SYRON. Exactly, which brings me to the next point. In
terms of looking at local markets, the employment situation certainly

8/20/91

-23-

in the life companies and in the property and casualty companies has
contributed further to this great feeling of pessimism, which is being
reflected in soft retail sales and also in continued concerns about
inflows and tax revenues of state and local governments and what that
will mean later on.
As far as the U.S. economy goes, the concern that we have is
that there may be an asymmetry of risks in the forecast toward the
down side.
There is information one can go through that would explain
much of the softness in the Ms and that alone might not be a cause for
concern if the softness in the Ms wasn't happening in an environment
in which there seems to be increasing causes for concern about the
real sectors of the economy. Also, what has been referred to as
[funds] moving out of banks into other areas, I think does have some
implication for credit flows.
We do see continued concern about
credit availability. I recently have spoken to the chief executive
officers and the chief financial officers of all of our large life
insurance companies and their standard reassurances suggest a thin
veneer [covering] a sense of great concern; in a couple of cases it is
almost in the panic stage or very close to it.
There is an enormous
caution in their lending and a great desire to increase liquidity.
One very large company which is in both the life and property and
casualty businesses was saying that it wanted to be in a situation
within a few months where it could liquify one-third of its portfolio
very quickly if it had to.
It's not quite clear to me how that's
going to happen.
I think many of the banks feel--and I think some of
this is the result of over-reaction by some of the regulators--that
there's a whole generation of commercial loan officers who may not be
able to function in the future because they have been through such
trauma in this whole aspect.
It is too early to know the impact of
the hurricane on the property and casualty companies but at this
stage, based on a few phone calls, it doesn't seem to be very great.
We generally agree that the Greenbook forecast is the most
probable outcome.
But I think, as Mike said, the probability
distribution has widened, and I would guess the tail on the negative
side has increased somewhat.
We're very dependent on a few things
that come back to confidence, including what happens in the auto
industry. And in this environment, the shocks that we have going on
internationally as well as domestically increase the concern on the
negative side.
It's something for us to take into consideration in
the next [portion] of the meeting.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, conditions in the Southeast
pretty much parallel what is happening around the nation; the pluses
and minuses in the national economy that Mike outlined are present in
our [regional] economy as well. We are seeing some modest growth in
retail sales along with some indications of increases in orders in
major industries. Housing is picking up a little--at least housing
starts are.
But I must say that there is a continuing sense of
pessimism among virtually all of the business people I talk to,
including directors. They are really afraid now of another downturn
or a double-dip.
People generally are also very concerned about the
bank mergers and other business consolidations that are moving along
so quickly and about the potential for unemployment in their own
situations and among their families.
It seems to me that business

8/20/91

investment is virtually on hold for 1992 as a result of this pessimism
among business people.
On the other hand, there are some positive signs. For
example, industrial parts of the region appear to be a bit stronger; I
wouldn't say it's great, but it is a little better. Increased auto
production has helped Tennessee; the Saturn plant there has picked up
its production. The commercial construction area seems to have hit
the bottom, according to our contacts, but as we all know the vacancy
rates are such that it's going to take a long time for that area to
improve, and we see no evidence that the improvement is accelerating
in any sense. We have budgetary restraints in virtually all of the
states in our District and that's leading to spending cuts. And the
depressed level of natural gas prices is causing cutbacks in
production and layoffs in that area.
The credit crunch continues to confuse me; I get differing
reports from different people. But cutting through all of the chaff,
I think creditworthy customers will be serviced by the banks. The
banks, in fact, are out looking for good loans but they're not finding
much demand. In summary, as far as the District is concerned, people
keep asking the questions: Where is the recovery? And if there is a
recovery, why aren't business conditions better than they seem to be?
On the national side, our forecast is very similar to the
Greenbook, although we do show somewhat slower growth in the fourth
quarter of this year and the first quarter of next year. And even
with that slower growth, our inflation number is not quite as
optimistic as the staff's; we're in the range of 4 percent versus the
staff's 3 to 3-1/2 percent. For reasons that have been indicated by
other people, I think the risks are clearly on the down side at the
moment. Like other people, while I don't ordinarily pay a great deal
of attention to M2, I think this persistence in its weakness is
telling us something that we have to be very careful about. Certainly
if it continues to grow at these rates, we could have some serious
repercussions. The financial sector also continues to concern me. We
have news of financial stress constantly in the newspapers. Added to
that now are scandals as well in the insurance companies. And while
it's too early to tell, if the situation in the Soviet Union continues
to cause uncertainty, I think that is going to cut into consumer
confidence as well. Altogether, I think the risks are very clearly on
the down side and we need to take that into account a little later
this morning.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, with regard to the national economy, I do
think the incoming data taken together are consistent with a modest
recovery of the type described in the Greenbook. I would add that I'm
also a bit more encouraged about our prospects for disinflation as
suggested in the Greenbook as well.
There's not much going on in the District that would make me
doubt this general kind of forecast--I suppose that's not the most
positive way to put it--except for some signs of strain and
disappointment in some businesses that may have thought the recovery
was going to be a little stronger than it has to date. But if you
look at the other data, nonfarm employment in the District is up

8/20/91

-25-

relative to a year ago and the agricultural sector outside of the
dairy industry is in pretty good shape.
So, things seem to be
continuing to move along reasonably well.
Having said that, as many
have already commented, there are reasons to be concerned
nevertheless.
Some comments have already been made about commercial
real estate. We know we had a drop there and values are in the
process of adjusting. But it seems to me that the spillover there is
perhaps even greater than I, at least, had anticipated--not only for
the financial sector and creditors in general, but for state and local
governments on the revenue side. And those governments are already
stressed. So, we're getting some restraint there in addition to all
the other factors that we can talk about.
And assuming nothing
terribly unusual comes out of the situation in Russia, we're getting
some restraint from the Federal budget as well.
So, when I add all
that up and couple it with the weakness in M2, I think there are
reasons to be concerned as to whether this is going to play out in
quite the positive way that the Greenbook would suggest.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I don't think there's any
question that the anecdotal side of things has gotten quite shaky
again. Some of that is because the typical CEO of a company never
really believed his or her own economists or other economists in terms
of the outlook, going back two or three months ago. And I think a lot
of business executives have interpreted recent data to mean that they
were right and the economists were wrong. My own sense of the
situation is that while things are not as good as they would like them
to be, they're not as bad as they think they are either.
I believe
the truth still lies somewhere in the middle. Now, having said that,
and as someone who has been sensitive to what I'll call financial
jitters for a long time, I do think it's fair to say that confidence
on the part of both consumers and business people is being further
shaken by the cumulative effects of financial jitters. And financial
jitters, as some people have already said, take a lot of forms here.
There are new questions about insurance company scandals, and consumer
delinquencies are rising. All of that is having a little impact, or
perhaps even a lot, in an insidious way on confidence in general. One
implication is that the economy at large is probably even more
vulnerable to any kind of financial surprise or shock, even though
I've believed it has been vulnerable for a long time.
There are also two things of a more intermediate nature that
worry me a bit relative to my earlier expectations.
One has already
been touched on and that is that while the inflation outlook in some
sense is better--and certainly I still think we can break that socalled core inflation rate of 4 percent that we've been living with
for most of the decade--I, too, look at that second-quarter data on
wages and so on with some concern. While I can readily see how we'll
break the 4 percent, I'm not nearly as sure as I was some months ago
that we can do a lot better than that.
Indeed, it seems to me that in
order to do a lot better than that one of two things has to happen.
One is that overall compensation has to bend down, and I'm getting a
little skeptical that that can bend down in any significant way except
in the context of an economic outlook that would be horrible
otherwise.
Or, we have to get some real recovery [in] productivity,
which doesn't look so [likely] either. So, again, I feel a little

-26-

8/20/91

less sanguine than I did before about the intermediate-term outlook
for inflation.
The other intermediate-term thing that has gotten worse is
the budgetary deficit outlook. If you look at these new estimates-whether you use OMB's or CBO's and whether you put the S&L [bailout
costs] in or out--there really is a material deterioration in the
intermediate outlook for the budgetary deficit. And that's a worry.
Now, as Mike said, even against the backdrop of those short- and
intermediate-term variables, one can conceive of a wide range of
I think the saving rate
possible outcomes over the forecast period.
is a very large wild card; indeed, in the context of Bob Black's
remarks about employment and wages and so on in other cycles, one big
difference is that in other cycles we didn't have a 3.5 percent saving
It's a little hard to see how that all
rate like we have right now.
will play out, especially if one is assuming implicitly that the rate
of increase in nominal wages and compensation has to come down a lot
So, there's a bit
and inflation is going to have to come down a lot.
of a conundrum there; again, I think the saving rate is a wild card.
Just a brief word if I may, Mr. Chairman, on M2--not so much
as a policy indicator but more in terms of what it may be telling us
In looking at all the work that the staff did, I
about the economy.
come away with the view that M2, at least in informational terms,
One is fairly benign, and that is that
seems to be saying two things.
this reach-for-yield [behavior]--in a context in which people are a
lot more sophisticated and alternative outlets are a lot easier and
cheaper to get at--is an important factor here. That, in and of
itself, is not something that I worry a lot about, if at all, in
But in looking at the staff's work, I come also to the
policy terms.
view that the credit crunch is indeed a factor. Now, I can't quite
yet sort out the demand side versus supply side influences that
constitute the credit crunch. But I do find very revealing the table
following page 6 in the staff memorandum where they try to look at the
relationship between core deposit growth, capital positions of banks,
and loan positions of banks. That table to me, which admittedly only
covers the very short period of June 3rd to August 5th, is a very
revealing table. Again, it doesn't tell us whether it's demand or
that this credit
supply, but I think it does tell us an awful lot:
crunch [phenomenon] is quite real and that that aspect of the way the
disintermediation process is working does matter for policy.
As I
said, the reach-for-yield [phenomenon], I think, is rather irrelevant.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
relevant issue.

that far.

Yes, this does suggest supply as the

I'm not sure I feel I can go quite
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Clearly, it says that supply is at work here.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
to suggest.

Well, that's what the matrix is trying

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it clearly says that, but
there are ways in which demand forces could also be producing at least
Certainly, I don't think one can say it's 100
some of this result.
percent supply. But to me it's a very revealing table and, unlike the
reach-for-yield phenomenon, does have some policy implications--though
not in terms of whether M2 should be used as a target.
That's another

8/20/91

-27-

issue altogether.
If anything, it says M2 shouldn't be used as a
target; but I don't want to get into that debate. What it does say to
me in the context of these other considerations, and in particular the
emphasis on financial jitters, is that while there is a broad range
[of risks, they are mostly] on the down side.
Having said that, I
think we're probably okay in terms of Mike's forecast or something
like it.
But the cumulative [impact of] all this financial stuff is a
real overhang on the whole outlook.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. With respect to the
Greenbook forecast, our staff forecast is very close to it but
continues to be, as it has in the past, a bit weaker in the latter
half of '91 and therefore all of '91 and a little stronger in '92; it
is really a shift, I think, of some of the component parts of the
forecast.
So, the Greenbook forecast, as far as I'm concerned at
least, looks to be the most likely outcome, and I think that the risks
are basically balanced on either side at this point and that there's
not a greater risk on one side than the other. As a matter of fact,
we took a look at the double-dip scenario, which Bob McTeer mentioned
before, and we could not see anything that resembled what the
historical experience has been on double-dips.
So, we believe that
the projection for continued slow growth over the next six quarters is
the most likely outcome.
With respect to conditions in the District, the economy seems
to be slowing somewhat from what was observed before.
It is due to a
stalling in the [production of] natural grains in the agricultural
sector and the sluggish energy and manufacturing sectors.
We're
projecting somewhat weaker export markets. And now this new event has
taken place. You will recall that the President did agree to provide
$900 million of export guarantees to the Soviet Union; that has been
put on hold as I understand it or has been or will be withdrawn,
depending upon the [political] outcome in the Soviet Union.
If that
is the case, then the crop prices that we're concerned about,
particularly corn, would be weakened somewhat simply because the
market has been diminished.
And that's notwithstanding the drought
conditions that we still have; that may not be quite as broadly spread
as in the Chicago District, but it is nonetheless real; it is spotty,
and its [impact in terms of] diminishing crops is uncertain. At the
District automobile manufacturing plants, production remains weak,
although each of them has come forth with a increased production
schedule starting in September.
For example, in the Kansas City area,
a second shift will be put back to work in a GM plant that has been on
layoff now for six to eight months.
The outlook for construction
activity in the District continues to improve, mostly because of gains
in residential and the non-building contract awards; the latter
include infrastructure improvements on the table now for bidding,
which will be concluded over the upcoming period. And despite a
recent modest increase in the number of active drilling rigs in the
District, energy activity remains sluggish and well below the level of
a year ago.
That's largely because of the uncertainty in the cost of
imported crude, and there's a very weak market in natural gas.
So,
there's not much to encourage somebody to do any exploratory
development or drilling at the moment.

-28-

8/20/91

With regard to the agricultural financial sector, the loanto-deposit ratio in those banks is only at about the 52 percent level.
In the whole District the loan-to-deposit
They're looking for loans.
ratio is at fairly low levels. There just is not the demand; there's
plenty of liquidity, apparently. Lastly, our quarterly agricultural
survey indicates that land prices have stabilized after coming off
very low levels over the past two to three years.
Prices are now
about 35 percent higher than they were at that low; we had seen
continued increases in agricultural land prices until this past
quarter, when they essentially flattened out.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
What I sense around the table is that most of us
are still keeping the faith about a modest recovery, but we have
I certainly
increased doubts about it and see more downside risk.
What one would like to see at this point is more
agree with that.
convincing signs of a cumulative upturn--self-feeding kinds of factors
in the economy. Yet in every one of those critical junctures, I think
caution and doubt are diluting their effect. What we count on is the
inventory kick and yet what we find there is a great deal of caution.
People are more into a "just-in-time" kind of inventory policy. We're
still getting liquidation; surely, at some point we will get
accumulation but it just doesn't seem to have the potential thrust to
At the next juncture, at the
the economy that one might expect.
hiring juncture in this linkage, we see the same kind of caution.
Most of the jobs have been created in the services sector in recent
years and we're already beginning to see much more caution and layoffs
in that sector. The next linkage is the consumer spending area; we
I must say
A linkage further out is investment.
see caution there.
in talking with the business community that I hear more and more talk
that '92 is going to be an extension of '91, and there's more caution
So, what bothers me about this emerging recovery is that I
there.
just don't sense that these cumulative self-feeding forces are going
to have the [usual] impact.
Add on the financial fragility and
So, I share the view that
perhaps that's part of the explanation.
while a modest recovery is still likely, the downside risks have
increased significantly in recent weeks. Also, whenever you see more
downside risk I think you have to ask yourself what the consequences
are. And while I don't think a double-dip is likely, I think that a
very slow recovery or something that approaches a double-dip really
could have some major consequences on getting the economy going
because basic confidence is in need of healing with these financial
So, I think we're in a situation now where the risks are
fragilities.
fairly significant and we have to deal with them.
How do you reconcile
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. May I just ask:
that now with the continued strength in your manufacturing survey?
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think what that survey is showing is the
same thing that we're seeing in industrial production. A lot of that
I find that we get those
seems to be auto-related and auto supply.
survey results--and they are very accurate if you look at them over
the last 20 years--and yet if you talk to people who run the companies
I find it difficult to reconcile
you would get a different story.
that.
That survey shows more optimism than any other anecdotal
I can understand that early on in a
information I'm picking up.
recovery but that survey is in its fifth month now of showing some

8/20/91

-29-

increases, which is consistent with the national industrial production
[data].
But it doesn't fit the mood that one senses. It doesn't
translate into hiring, for example, and it's not translating into
improved capital spending plans.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Have you matched the actual report that
you get against the rhetoric of the individual who is associated with
that [company]?
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I haven't gone back and done that detailed
a look. We have called back a number of these companies to verify the
numbers. And, you know, it is a diffusion index; it doesn't actually
measure the level of output. It just is another example of this gap
between people who are running firms, and--.
I think Jerry may have
said it right:
Things are not as bad as the business community thinks
they are, but they're probably not as optimistic as their economists
are forecasting things are going to be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. On this issue of concerns about the economy, we
do pick up the same concerns when talking with business people. But
when one pokes at their order books and asks them what is going on,
really it's a matter of perception in that they [anticipated] they
were going to get a stronger kick than they have gotten and their
orders are either flat or up only marginally. So there is this lack
of fulfillment of their expectations about what a recovery is all
about. There are a couple of points to make about that. I didn't
look at the numbers, but I suspect that going into a recovery in past
cycles there was a lot more monetary stimulus in place, which
ultimately led to some problems. So, I would tend to argue that this
ought to be the kind of recovery one should have rather than the other
kind. In terms of the risks that the economy is facing, I prefer to
look at it the other way around: Namely, that a major mistake--if
there's one being made or the risk of one being made--is that
inflation expectations are too high relative to the policy that we've
been delivering. And it's crucial right now in the [wage and price]
setting processes that people recognize the kind of policy that we've
delivered because if they don't and they set prices too high, then
another adjustment will have to be made. People's [sales]
expectations won't be fulfilled in terms of their price increases.
And it seems to me that the only way to convince people, given that we
don't tie ourselves more explicitly to a price level target, is simply
to wait it out.
The problem with waiting it out for better numbers-and I'm confident that we're going to get those because I think we've
put a policy in place that will generate a lower rate of inflation in
the near term--is that we're in the business of trying to change
expectations and get people to adjust their price setting to reflect
the policy we've delivered. Yet we could be in a position I think, at
least I hope, of trying to boost monetary growth at the same time.
So, this is a long-winded way of getting back to the idea that we
probably ought to tie ourselves to multi-year targets and they ought
to be associated with the price level so we don't end up in this
circumstance again.
The Fourth District hasn't changed much.
[Business activity]
didn't go down a lot and is not coming back very strongly. The
consumer side is picking up a little. The capital goods side is

-30-

8/20/91

rather mixed; some people feel they're at the bottom; others show
slight improvements in their order books.
Overall, the District is
holding up pretty well because it didn't go down much.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. The numbers for our District show a little
different pattern. These would be for the three-month period ended in
June, so they're somewhat dated. But this is the first time we've
shown overall employment declines in recent months. Manufacturing
hasn't really changed much; it has been declining slightly. What has
happened is that we haven't had the offsets on the non-manufacturing
In
side.
There is particular weakness in mining and construction.
mining it has to do with the Clean Air Act and the high sulfur coal
deposits in Illinois and Kentucky; in construction, it's a reflection
I will say,
of [the nationwide slump that] we're all familiar with.
though, that contracts in both residential and nonresidential
construction show growth, so I think there's some improvement in store
down the road there. Just one piece of anecdotal information on this
a large cotton
inventory story:
grower, and he mentioned that the consumption of cotton in the textile
industry is at the highest rate in 15 years. Mills are running flat
out 7 days a weeks and it's basically-[That's] the reason the crop is so huge;
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I gather they've got the supply to use.
MR. MELZER. Right. But the other comment he made is that
the inventories have been run down to a [low] level. His instinct,
anyway, is that we'll be seeing a turnaround in the inventory
situation in that particular industry.
On a more general note, having listened to all the
commentary, I think we have to caution ourselves at this point not to
get whipsawed too much by the incoming data. We're all familiar with
the lags in policy, and this is going to be a time when expectations
are going to be very volatile. And at least in terms of how I look at
policy, I don't think M2 is a very good indicator of the thrust of
policy; I think we have to look at something narrower. On that basis
the thrust of policy has continued to increase throughout this year.
We just have to bear in mind, for example, that the growth rate of M1
I certainly can't pretend to
over the course of 1991 has accelerated.
tell you whether a 7-1/2 percent growth rate in Ml is too much
I'm just saying if we look at that as an indicator of the
stimulus.
thrust of policy, we've been pumping more and more in. And at some
point we have to have the confidence that the actions we've taken are
going to have the desired effect and not [let ourselves] get whipsawed
by incoming data on the real economy. To me that's a very dangerous
guide for what monetary policy ought to be.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I'm having trouble getting used to
a kind of newfound optimism, and I don't quite understand why I should
I suppose there are
be optimistic when the majority seem not to be.
two reasons.
One is that I had the lowest forecast for real growth
among the Committee members; and I had the thought that given where
Mike [Prell] is now I'd almost be willing to meet him half way. So,

8/20/91

-31-

maybe I had a lower forecast to begin with for '91. The second reason
may be more strange, and that is that I've been in Colorado, and
Colorado seems quite different than it has been for many years during
its very long recession. When I look in Colorado, I see runways and
runways and runways being built; I've never seen so many runways under
construction--both in Colorado Springs and Denver. But there's a new
atmosphere there. And it shows some of the ways that our system
works. When house values are where they are in a place like Colorado
Springs compared to California, people start to move from California
to Colorado Springs. The kind of values there are just rather
unbelievable. And there's certainly a definite pickup. But that's
too minor a factor to explain much about the U.S. economy.
What is it, then, that gives me more optimism? And this is
an optimism for 1992 maybe more so than for 1991. The optimism, I
guess, comes from a reluctant realization that I'm closer to Tom
Melzer in regard to M2 than I am to Lee Hoskins. I'm just not as
worried as I was earlier about those M2 numbers. Don's paper was an
excellent paper; it was very helpful to me to mull over what is going
on in M2. And I think there's a realization that M2 is both the
outcome as well as the cause. It just seems to me that M2 probably is
not going to respond as much as the members of the Committee would
like. But it may not have much to do with the outcome in the real
economy.
Maybe my optimism is also due to the fact that the real
estate price event may be almost over and that should bode well for
the banking system, which I see recovering and which I think will give
us a different result in 1992. But at the same time commodity prices
continue to be pretty weak and rather inconsistent with a strong
recovery. So, I think that means we should take a little off of our
estimates for the third quarter. But if the third-quarter estimates
are a little softer, that seems to me an environment in which maybe
what has happened to long-term bond prices can continue if the
Committee is willing to be patient. That is, if we continue to get
through this quarter and into the next and the PPI numbers are
consistent with what commodity prices are showing, then it seems to me
that with patience we may have opportunities for additional, perhaps
minor, steps to be taken in time, and long bond prices would respond
as favorably as they did in this last move. Now, we not only have
long bond prices for Treasuries down to 8.10 percent but we've had
even more of a gain in mortgage-backed securities; and those spreads
over Treasuries are narrowing considerably. And it seems to me that
that bodes well for the housing recovery--which is a very gradual
recovery, but I think it still adds quarter-to-quarter to the kind of
results that we want to see.
The final reason for my optimism is optimism with regard to
the net export picture. It seems to me that as Mexico moves more to a
market-system economy with more sound monetary policy it earns the
right to be a capital importer and, indeed, it is becoming a capital
importer. Policies they have in place will earn them an increasing
right to be a capital importer, which will be very helpful to them in
their development. But I see also throughout Latin America and South
America a desire to follow that mode.
And if these countries become
the capital importers that I expect them to become because of improved
monetary and fiscal policies, then it seems to me that that bodes

-32-

8/20/91

better for our export industries. So, I look for a somewhat better
outcome there than even the staff has forecast.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I had a great temptation just to
associate myself completely with President Corrigan's remarks, but I
can't resist the opportunity to make a few additional comments.
Obviously, the United States is probably less susceptible to whatever
the events in the Soviet Union will bring forth than other countries.
At this stage it's very difficult to quantify that, but it certainly
muddies the crystal ball a little regardless. In spite of these
glamorous mergers that were recently announced and in spite of the
fact that I share Governor Angell's view that the banking system will
look better in the fourth quarter and going into next year, I believe
it is still fragile and still very defensive in its attitude.
I think
there will be further large failures and that the effect of that could
be to make the others, the survivors, even more defensive than they
currently are. Business profits remain very poor; they're
disappointing. And I think restructuring among business firms will
continue in order to improve their ability to handle debt more
comfortably. And that's hardly the climate for an improved outlook
for business fixed investment.
I'm still convinced that the basic problem with the pace of
recovery and the sustainability of recovery is one of confidence
rather than the level of interest rates. That is to say, I believe
consumer confidence is reining in the growth in retail sales. I think
that business confidence is responsible for the slack demand for
business credit. And lender confidence is responsible for the lack of
aggressive lending on the part of the banking system. The credit
crunch, whether it is due to a reluctance to lend or a reluctance to
borrow, is a reality. And it's the greatest threat to the recovery,
which I believe is clearly underway at this stage of the game. I
think banks are enjoying their new margins and I think they intend to
enjoy those new margins rather than lower rates in order to attract
more business, even if policy is eased further. If the banks are
reluctant lenders and are well stocked with securities, they are not
going to be very competitive in bidding for [retail] time deposits,
and that may account for some of the recent dynamics or lack of
dynamics in M2. The M2 phenomenon is not well enough understood to
persuade me that it is terribly important to this whole equation and
that' its current behavior would justify further policy accommodation.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS. Coming into this weekend I [would have] agreed
with much of what has been said around here. We had a pretty weak
recovery, one with clear upward impetus in the industrial sector and
in residential housing, but one that in some sense had not taken root
in the way that Ed Boehne described with his cumulative reinforcing
process and one characterized by this dissonance between the anecdotal
data and the industrial production data. If you think of the dynamics
of this recovery, you can understand some of this dissonance because
if you talk to a manufacturing plant executive, he or she is
increasing production not because sales have jumped but really because
inventory is too lean. At some stage the cessation of inventory
liquidation is going to cause manufacturers to start increasing

8/20/91

-33-

production even though sales haven't improved very much. That's not
In spite of the
likely to make that executive feel very comfortable.
fact that the industrial production numbers are going to look better
and are going to give thrust to the economy, that increase in
production is not responding to an immediate, visible upturn in sales.
And I think we're not likely to get good anecdotal data in spite of
the fact that the industrial production numbers show that [production]
is going on.
The second stage, of course, is that the higher production
should give rise to higher income and then to higher sales and then
these folks should cheer us some.
It's pretty clear from the
anecdotal data that there's not a lot of evidence that the second
stage, which I would consider the reinforcing self-feeding process, is
really taking hold.
So, there is reason for concern. The argument
that the industrial production numbers indicate that things are going
pretty well is easy to make from our marble enclave here in Washington
and harder to make if you're on the front line. But this is the tone
I would currently whistle while walking through this graveyard.
My view is that we're not far off track; we may be
[Laughter]
marginally off track. But there is concern about this process taking
root.
There's also concern about the waves of bad news that hit
everyone about the financial system; even the BCCI and Solomon
Brothers publicity contributes to the climate, though it probably
doesn't have much of an impact on too many people. We continue to
have weak credit growth. Money growth has been weak for over a year.
I wouldn't be concerned by 3-1/2 percent M2 growth at this stage. But
it seems to me that in the last couple of months the bottom has really
fallen out and I am concerned about that rapid deceleration; even Ml
I think Don's analysis did
decelerated pretty dramatically in July.
suggest that money matters, and I believe the central bank should take
responsibility.
I agree with Jerry that a prime concern is the supply
side or the intermediation side. You can add the insurance companies
to the list of sources of finance that are not likely to be helpful to
So, there continue to be concerns
below-investment-grade businesses.
--in my mind concerns that perhaps [extend] a bit [beyond] the real
economy.
Now, when you layer this weekend's events in the Soviet Union
on top of this, it seems to me that those events are also clearly
contractionary. When I go down my list of channels of influence, we
have the possibility of reduced confidence by consumers and
The Iraqi invasion last August was met by a historically
businesses.
[The current situation] is a
large collapse in consumer confidence.
bit different, but at least at the margin it can affect confidence,
which can affect spending by consumers on durables and capital
It's going to have to hold the possibility
spending by businesses.
for lowering export growth, as the European economies are affected.
We've already seen a higher dollar--maybe a little less higher today
than it was yesterday--and this again is a contractionary factor.
[There may be] higher oil prices with the possibility of a reduction
in Soviet supply; and a marginally higher long-term rate, which we saw
at the end of the day yesterday, is a response to increased
uncertainty. The world is a riskier place to invest long term for 30
years than it was at the beginning of the weekend and there are more
incentives to stay short and liquid and there may be marginally lower
stock prices as well. Defense spending might be a plus; it's also

8/20/91

-34-

true that the political process involved in increasing defense
spending has some risks of its own to the budget deal.
When I total up this list, it's clearly contractionary on
virtually every component. But compared to the Iraqi invasion, the
In
event is clearly a lot less dramatic in virtually every component.
confidence the Iraqi event confronted Americans with the immediate
prospect of the commitment of U.S. troops and also revived the
memories of the oil shocks of the '70s.
The Iraqi event also produced
much more dramatic increases in oil prices, in the long bond rate, and
Though the events of the
a much larger decrease in stock prices.
weekend are clearly contractionary, their cumulative weight adds
probably only marginally to the outlook; it is more likely to produce
a downward deflection in the slope of the recovery rather than tipping
the economy into recession as the Iraqi affair did. The resilience of
the financial markets in absorbing this shock yesterday is consistent
with this assessment.
Of course, when I say it's going to deflect the
slope of the recovery, I have to admit we don't have much slope to
work with, and I think it does heighten some of the downside risks.
The real risk is that this is only the assessment of act one, and this
Indeed, this is only the
is not likely to be a one-act play.
beginning. The episode is not over and we're virtually guaranteed to
have future shocks as the situation is resolved or at least
stabilized. When you consider the critical condition of the Soviet
economy, the possibility of civil war, the still formidable military
strength of the Soviets both in conventional forces and with 30,000
nuclear devices, it's pretty clear that this has the potential to
deteriorate into a situation which is at least as damaging to our
economy as the Iraqi war.
So, from the [perspective of a] first analysis, these events
seem clearly but only marginally contractionary. It does has the
potential for more serious consequences. When we add it all up, I
think we have a pretty problematic situation to begin with and this
adds somewhat to the downside risks and increases the tail of the
It is worth noting, as I mentioned, that the
risks on the down side.
markets over here at least responded quite well to the first round
yesterday. It's not clear the markets need our help at all in
As people mentioned, long rates also have come
responding to this.
down almost 50 basis points in 2 months in the face of good but by no
means very impressive inflation numbers and this should help the
economy. We made a move a couple of weeks ago, which should also
help.
But as Governor LaWare noted, it has yet to dislodge the prime
rate.
It could be that this event might actually increase the growth
of M2 by increasing the demand for liquidity, but I would not be any
surer how to interpret that than I am the current improved situation.
The big factor is that events are just beginning to unfold
and it's very important to assess the shape and pattern of events as
I don't think we should wait until
they start unfolding very rapidly.
we have hard evidence of a faltering economy before we consider
another move, given the lags involved. We have to anticipate; it
would be nice to get ahead of some of these contractionary forces.
But I think it will be most useful to see the early returns out of
the confidence surveys, the new orders for capital
this episode:
goods surveys, the stock market behavior, and the money figures as
well.
There's certainly a lot of noise in the system now. And even
though I do feel that the downside risks have been marginally

8/20/91

-35-

increased and the potential for larger problems has been increased
pretty substantially, I think it's useful to wait until the noise
settles down a little and then anything we decide to do might be more
clearly heard.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Well, Mr. Chairman, it has all been said and the
I
I would just add one quick thought.
hour is getting late.
certainly share all of the downside concerns that have been expressed
around this table this morning and all of the nervousness not only
because I get it from this group but from contacts outside as well.
But I do think it's a little early to make any judgments. While we're
getting an awful lot of anecdotal evidence that is of great concern-and that needs to be given a lot of attention--I would also try to
keep in mind that we have a good many economic series that are
Some pretty slow but pretty firm
beginning to come along fairly well.
trends are beginning to fall in place in industrial production,
housing, retail sales, the purchasing managers survey, and others.
And certainly all of economic history and the thrust of analysis will
tell us that a double-dip is unlikely. Obviously, it could occur, but
it appears unlikely. As I try to formulate my own thinking, I keep in
mind Tom Melzer's caution of a few minutes ago that we not get
whipsawed by the data. We also have to be careful that we don't get
whipsawed too quickly by the anecdotal information. So, I think it's
perhaps a time to be a little cautious and see what emerges, along the
lines that David just summarized.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Thank you very much.
coffee has arrived.
It's probably cold now!

I'm informed that

[Coffee break]
[Military forces have surrounded the
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Parliament] building [in Moscow], but there are also 150,000 people
around the building and the crowd is growing. This is a confrontation
The stock market, which
that is obviously growing [unintelligible].
It's an
was up over 30 points, is now up 8; it's still up.
extraordinary historic event in the process of occurring. I hope we
can finish up so we can go and participate.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. BLACK.

Or watch.
I want to be a spectator, not a participant.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Don Kohn.

MR. KOHN. In that context, Mr. Chairman, it's awfully
difficult to talk about M2, but I thought I'd do it anyhow. It's not
[Statement--see
perhaps at the top of everyone's mind right now.
Appendix].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Lee.

MR. HOSKINS.
I have two questions for you, Don. One is on
Have you run that out any further in terms of assuming
the P* chart.
a monetary growth rate in the middle of the target range and seeing
what you would get for the inflation rate in 1993?

-36-

8/20/91

MR. KOHN.

Not since the July Bluebook.

MR. HOSKINS.

MR. KOHN.
there is not--

We did it and it comes out to be 1-1/2 percent.

Since it's already down in the 2 percent area

MR. HOSKINS. But my second question to you is: Do you have
any sense of what kind of deviation from trend growth in M2 for a
period of time has an impact on the economy?
MR. KOHN. Well, we tried to look at that in a sort of
reduced form way through the various ranges of causality tests in the
VAR models. In the case of the more extended VAR model it had an
effect but a fairly small one. That is, once you took account of
interest rates and stock prices and so forth, a 1 percent deviation of
M2 took about 1/4 point off of real growth for the next year and a
half or so. So, there was an effect in that model, anyhow; it was
fractional. But even taking account of all those other financial
variables, there was a significant relationship between M2 leading
income.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Any other questions for Don?
If not,
let me get started on the discussion. Incidently, one of the problems
I think we're having is that when a recession is over, by definition,
the economy is at the lowest point in a cycle and it feels awful. The
anecdotal reports we're getting from a lot of people are a reflection
of the fact that the levels of orders, activity, etc. are
exceptionally low. It's very interesting to get a sense [of the
views] in the political realm; there is a confusion as to whether "the
recession ends" means the receding has come to an end or that the
economy is back up to normal. I think the overwhelming evidence is
that it's the latter [view] that we run into. So, we observe
different views, as Jerry points out, between economists and
economists' bosses. I think we're all talking about different things,
basically, and that's an issue that is going to continue to confront
us.

The issue that concerns me most--the one that Jerry also
raised with respect to the saving linkage--means in effect that there
is a personal consumption expenditure restraint on this expansion.
And although residential construction is obviously moving moderately,
nonresidential is not; capital expenditures are not; and export demand
is moving but not exceptionally. So, the whole dynamics of a recovery
basically falls on the inventory dynamics. There what we are clearly
seeing is something that in a way is unusual. With the measured rate
of [inventory] liquidation that we are getting--assuming the numbers
are correct--one would expect to begin to see the historic dynamics
start to emerge here. The way it has tended to run historically is
that as liquidation begins to ease and production moves up to
consumption, the lead times on the deliveries of materials begin to
stretch out as we begin to get some squeeze on [production]
facilities. And the increase in lead times has created an increased
desire for inventories on the part of the purchasing managers. They
start to increase their orders to reach their new inventory goals,
which in turn puts still greater pressure on production facilities,
which in turn is what that self-feeding process from the inventory
side is all about. However, if we look at the lead times in the

8/20/91

-37-

National Association of Purchasing Managers [survey], it's pretty
clear that for production materials especially it is dead, flat.
It
actually has been easing down recently.
And it is consistent with the
notion that "just-in-time" has really taken over the whole inventory
process.
But unless and until we begin to see some of that pressure
emerging and the dynamics of new orders beginning to move in the
historic pattern, we will have this very extraordinary concern that
this [recovery] may stall on the final demand side before the dynamics
take hold.
I doubt that that's going to happen; there is no reason to
suggest that.
As Governor Angell points out, the commodity prices are
soft and are in fact reflecting this very process, but they're not
collapsing; indeed, the steel scrap price has even gone up a little
There are
and that, as Wayne knows, is my favorite commodity price.
good reasons for that.
It actually has been telling us a great deal
about the durable goods part of the system.
In any event, while I do
think that the odds still strongly favor the ignition of the dynamics
and the acceleration [of the expansion] and, indeed, the likelihood is
that the next Greenbook forecast will be revised up, the risk
structure has nevertheless clearly increased.
So, while there is clearly no policy purpose that I can see
in moving rates lower immediately, I would suggest nonetheless that
with a directive without change--the "B" version--we ought to be
asymmetric toward ease with the recognition that if events continue to
But we ought to be careful to make sure
deteriorate, we would move.
that that is in fact what is going on and not be whipsawed by the
At the moment it is very
statistics as they go back and forth.
difficult to make the case that the economy is falling back into a
double-dip recession.
The recovery is slow, sluggish, and
frustrating, but it is still plus.
And it could very well become a
significantly larger plus than any of us senses, certainly from the
anecdotal evidence.
If we get to the point where the evidence suggests that
further easing might be necessary, I suspect that would require a
discount rate move.
I think we'd have to be prepared to do that if
events move in an adverse direction.
In any case, I would like to put
on the table as a suggestion that we adopt variant "B" asymmetric
toward ease.
And frankly, I would prefer version II of the text that
Don suggested [in the Bluebook] with respect to the language of how
the money supply concerns are evolving and are affecting policy as
they very obviously are.
President Syron.
MR. SYRON. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your conclusions and
On the margin I
prescription, which is "B" asymmetric toward ease.
would be reasonably comfortable going to version II in the current
circumstances.
I must say that in a lot of other circumstances I
would have a concern about moving the aggregates up to that level of
prominence.
But given the weight that has been assigned to the
aggregates by many in the public arena and in the markets, I think
it's worth doing.
My concurrence with your view is based on the
notion that it's not just an immediate double-dip that is my concern;
I'm really concerned about a prolonged period of weakness
characterized by no growth or very slow growth rather than a doubledip and the potential impact on the financial system.
That could lead
us potentially to a situation that, unlike the forecast, causes a
downturn later on that would lead us to have to take moves that are

8/20/91

-38-

inconsistent with our longer-term objectives.
better than more later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

So,

I think less now is

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS. Mr. Chairman, I can live with your suggestion.
I would prefer to move now--not because I'm so wedded to M2 that I'll
live and die with it, but because it's the instrument that we've been
using. In terms of our targeting, it's the one we've been telling the
market that we were going to deliver on, and we're running the risk of
falling outside the target range. It also seems to me to be the
I don't know what we can do
aggregate that better affects the future.
about the economy today or tomorrow; I don't think we can do much.
But we can do something about 1992. And if we've erred and M2 comes
back, then I'm perfectly prepared to reverse course.
But I judge
policy essentially by rates of change in the monetary aggregates, and
we're deviating from trend [M2 growth by] perhaps as much as 2
percentage points. What we think we know about that is that it's
going to slow the economy--unnecessarily, I think--in 1992.
So, I
would urge you to move sooner rather than later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, in most cases I would agree with
Lee, but I think there are some special factors at work here.
So, I
would buy all three of your recommendations--"B," asymmetry toward
ease, and version II.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, I would agree with your
recommendation on alternative B.
It does seem clear that the economy
is likely to undergo a moderate recovery and that--also similar to the
Greenbook forecast--we'll see modest gains with regard to inflation.
However, I do feel that there are risks on both sides of the forecast
and I'm not so sure that they're all that unbalanced.
So, if I had a
preference, it would be for symmetric language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor LaWare.

MR. LAWARE. Mr. Chairman, I agree with the "B"
recommendation. Like President Parry, I would prefer the symmetric
language.
I guess I'm not persuaded that we have enough certainty
about the behavior of M2 to think that we can push the button and make
it happen.
I don't expect that the projection on the growth levels
under the different scenarios is necessarily going to happen just that
way. So, I would prefer "B" symmetric.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN.
I support your recommendation, Mr. Chairman.
It
seems to me that whatever the explanation for M2 may be--and I don't
know that we'll ever have a fully satisfactory one--this is not the
time to let it either fall below the target path or deviate very
significantly from its performance over the last four years or so.
So, I think we should pay some attention to it.
And we probably
should go with the language in version II, giving M2 somewhat greater
prominence in these circumstances, which I think is appropriate.

-39-

8/20/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I agree with your recommendation
on "B," and the version II [language] is okay. I'd have a slight
preference for symmetric language but with you at the switch I don't
see that the meaning is any different. [Laughter]
I would like to suggest that what we're going through here
is, of course, painful. But it's less painful to me than what I
considered to be of some possibility six months ago, which was that
we'd be through this event and back out and never get the rate of
inflation down. It just seems to me that we do have to have a little
patience here. I think we're entering a period in which we're making
more progress toward price stability than during any of the period
that I've been here. And there's so much joy in that to me that I'm
able in a sense to endure a little of the agony. But that doesn't
mean that I want it to continue into another year. I'm very open to
the Chairman's suggestion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, given the risks as I see them--I
think I heard some comments of the same nature around the table--I
would prefer to do a bit more now. But having said that, I find your
recommendation entirely acceptable: namely, alternative "B" with
[Nevertheless], I hope it would not take the
version II language.
accumulation of an awful lot of negative data before we make a move.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
language version?
MR. KEEHN.

How would you go on the directive

Version II.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, I certainly concur with your "B"
asymmetric toward ease recommendation, but I would prefer the language
in version I. I don't want to quarrel about it; I'm not going to vote
"no" over it. But in the light of our long inertia, as we discussed
earlier this morning, and the factors that we've discussed around this
table that surround M2, the situation just doesn't seem to me of a
nature that it would call for a departure [from wording] that we have
been using for a long, long time. So, I would prefer staying with
version I but can accept version II.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I think one can make a fairly
persuasive case for easing now. I would make it more on the basis of
a boost to confidence and getting a little ahead of the risk and also
with some element of M2. But having said that, I don't think it's a
compelling argument, and I would be satisfied with the prescription
you have outlined, which would be "B" asymmetrical. I have a slight
preference for version I, but I can certainly live with version II.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

-40-

8/20/91

MR. MELZER. I prefer "B" symmetric, but were I voting I
could certainly live with what you suggested. With respect to the
language, let me just raise a question. It's possible that M2's
behavior has nothing to do with what the real economy may be doing,
and I question how we would be reacting to it.
Let's say that we're
sitting here a month from now and M2 is still not performing and we're
much more comfortable about what we see unfolding anecdotally on the
real side; I think that language could trap us.
I'd be much more
comfortable if, when we refer to the monetary aggregates, we were
I think
referring to them very broadly--in other words, including Ml.
we're getting ourselves into a trap in terms of too much focus on M2
and M3, which we can't directly control.
We would have much more
opportunity to keep ourselves out of a corner that we may be painting
I'm not saying we should
ourselves into if we thought about M1 a bit.
target Ml; but if we thought about it a little more, it might help
keep us from getting painted into that corner. So, for that reason
and because I presume we're not really looking at Ml, I'd favor
version I in the language; I don't want to be painted into that
corner.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Mullins.

MR. MULLINS.
I think there is a legitimate case for making a
move now, but perhaps there's a somewhat more persuasive case to stay
asymmetric toward ease and assess the impact of the last move. The
lower long rates may have some impact, and if we can get some returns
from them as events unfold, our moves may have a bit more impact later
on.
So, I would support asymmety toward ease, although it seems to me
the way things are shaping up that the probability is pretty high that
I would also marginally prefer version I,
we will have to move again.
under the same logic that Governor Kelley and Tom Melzer mentioned.
We have a strong tradition of no change in this directive, as you
pointed out.
But it does reduce our flexibility marginally.
I could
easily live with version II, but I would have a marginal preference
for version I.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
"B" asymmetric is okay with me. On
the language, I seem to remember that at the end of the last meeting I
said something along the lines of "The worst thing I can think of in
some sense is an economy that appears to be recovering and M2 is dead
in the water."
And that's what we've got.
I don't trust M2 and I
trust it less today than I did six weeks ago.
For that reason, I
would favor version I. I think Tommy's point about getting trapped by
that is a concern.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It's the obvious problem.

President

McTeer.
I
MR. MCTEER. I have no problem with your recommendation.
would have a slight preference for alternative A and version II,
primarily because I think the economy could use some lower interest
rates.
And if we can believe the menu that has been presented before
us, we have an opportunity here to get some lower interest rates with
If we have a choice
very little acceleration of money growth rates.
like that, I don't think we ought to turn it down. But your

8/20/91

-41-

recommendation would be fine and I would urge you to use your
asymmetry quickly.
MR. MELZER.

Like Wayne did.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

[Laughter]

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think your recommendation makes sense.
I came to this meeting, before the Russian developments, thinking that
we ought to ease now; but there is something to be said for waiting.
But I wouldn't be overly patient about using the asymmetry.
I have a
slight preference for version II but not a huge one.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.
I would opt for "B" with a symmetric directive,
given the fact that you have the authority under the procedures to
move without consultation of the Committee.
I would marginally favor
version II.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay.

MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, after hearing Mike and Tom, I
think I would really prefer version I.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, I want to split the vote because I
think that's an important difference. What we'll do is vote
separately on the language because, as I read it, we have a fairly
substantial consensus on alternative "B" asymmetric but not on which
version of the language. And I think it would be best if we voted
separately.
MR. ANGELL.
Chairman?
MR. KOHN.
something?
MR. ANGELL.

Do you want a recorded vote in the minutes, Mr.
Why don't you just have a show of hands or

Why don't we just recount?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What's wrong with having a recorded

vote?
MR. KOHN.

Because then people who dissent may have to write

dissents!
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Okay, good enough.

[Laughter]

MR. KOHN. More accurately, the Secretariat would have to
write dissents for people.
MR. BERNARD(?)

I could live with a dissent or two.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Since he has the official scorekeeping,
I can [check] the score.
I have:
Corrigan I; Angell I; Black II,
Forrestal I; Keehn II; Kelley I; LaWare-MR. LAWARE.

I.

-42-

8/20/91

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

Mullins I; Parry--

II.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That is very slightly in favor of
version I, so I would propose for a vote alternative "B" asymmetric
toward ease and version I with respect to the language. Could you
read that?
MR. BERNARD.
"In the implementation of policy for the
immediate future, the Committee seeks to maintain the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions.
Depending upon progress toward
price stability, trends in economic activity, the behavior of the
monetary aggregates, and developments in foreign exchange and domestic
financial markets, somewhat greater reserve restraint might or
somewhat lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable in the
intermeeting period. The contemplated reserve conditions are expected
to be consistent with a resumption of growth of M2 and M3 in the weeks
ahead; but in view of the decline already posted since June, the
Committee anticipates that M2 would be little changed and M3 would be
down about"--do you want 1-1/2 percent?
MR. KOHN.

Well, make it 1 percent.

MR. BERNARD.
--"down at an annual rate of about 1 percent
over the period from June through September."
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Will you call the roll?

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Black
President Forrestal
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor LaWare
Governor Mullins
President Parry
1st.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Okay. Our next meeting is on October
And we have 9 minutes until we begin our 1:00 p.m. luncheon.
MR. BERNARD.

Dining Room E.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLACK.

Dining Room E, a celebration.

Celebration?
END OF MEETING

