Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
May 20, 1986

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 20, 1986, at 9:15 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mrs
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Guffey
Horn
Johnson
Melzer
Morris
Rice
Seger
Wallich

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, 1/ General Counsel
Mr. Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. J. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Prell,
and Siegman, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account

1/

Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting of
April 1, 1986.

5/20/86
Mr. Coyne, 1/ Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr..Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of New York
Messrs. Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scadding, Scheld,
Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Minneapolis,
Dallas, San Francisco, Chicago, New York, and
Atlanta, respectively
Messrs. Burger, Cook, and Fieleke, Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, Richmond,
and Boston, respectively

1/

Entered meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting of
April 1, 1986.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
May 20, 1986
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Is there a motion to approve the minutes?

SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

Without objection.

Mr. Cross.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any questions or comments?

MR. WALLICH. Is there some presumption that this situation
will go on and eventually--[not] immediately--that there will be
continuing pressure?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Excuse me, I was distracted.

MR. WALLICH. Sorry, I was trying to say that [the dollar]
was being held up temporarily, but over time--half a year, a year-would this look toward continuing pressures on the dollar?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
pressures?

Would what look toward continuing

I think the question, Mr. Chairman, is whether a
MR. TRUMAN.
resumption of downward pressure on the dollar is expected.
Well, that certainly is going to depend very much
MR. CROSS.
on how the economic data unfold. But one thing that has been an
important factor in the dollar having stopped its decline has been, if
not a change in the comments and rhetoric and the statements made by a
number of officials in a lot of countries, certainly a view in the
market that the attitudes of the officials in those countries--here
and in Japan and in Germany--are such that there tends not to be
concern about the level of the dollar now. Or, at least these
countries are not pressing to see it go down further. And in the view
of the Europeans and the Japanese, there is the beginning of an
expression of some concern should the dollar go down further.
So I
think we've seen in the market during this period great attention paid
to official attitudes; and there is a different perception in what
those attitudes are.
There is a view that at least for the time being
there is not felt to be any need to try to guide the dollar down
further.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think there's any safe bet as to
what the market will do over the next 6 months to a year.
SPEAKER(?).

Or two weeks.

MR. FORRESTAL. Sam, are the Japanese continuing to show an
interest in the government securities market?
MR. CROSS. Peter can comment on that, but as far as we can
tell they're showing a considerable interest in the government

5/20/86

-2-

securities market.
Apparently, they picked up quite substantial
amounts of the latest issues. We did hear in the first part of April
that the long-term capital outflows from Japan were declining, but the
most recent information--and we talked to the Japanese a few days ago
--was that the capital outflows from Japan through April and early May
have continued to be very large. Now, that doesn't mean it's all
coming to dollars because there are some attractions in Australian and
other currencies.
Also, it doesn't mean that they aren't covering
some substantial parts possibly by hedging; we don't know. But
certainly, from what we can tell they are continuing to buy very
substantial amounts of U.S. government securities.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
I could add to that.
As Sam said, they are
certainly [active]; in this last bond auction they took roughly
of a $9 billion auction. The interest does tend to be a little
sporadic and one gets the impression in talking to people in the
market that sometimes it's waning or sometimes waxing stronger. We
have talked to some of the Japanese firms about it and we get the
impression that there is more time and effort put into diversifying
out of government securities into other dollar securities and into
investments in the securities of other countries, but with some
interest continuing in the dollar and in U.S. government securities.
MR. PARRY. Sam, what has been the change in the yen relative
to other countries that are competitive with Japan like Korea, Taiwan,
and Hong Kong?
MR. CROSS.
Those currencies have tended to move with the
dollar, so the yen has changed against them in the same way that it
has changed against the dollar. And that is a matter that is causing
some concern for them because they see the diversion of what they've
been selling to Korea, being sold by Korea, Taiwan, and elsewhere.
And we're seeing moves by the Japanese to shift to those currencies
and to increase their ownership in output [facilities] from there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll ask you an impossible question, Mr.
Truman. What will be the GNP increases in Japan and Germany in the
first quarter?
What would be your best guess at the moment?
MR. TRUMAN. My best guess on Japan is something like 2
percent at an annual rate--very low, and maybe something about the
same order of magnitude, say, 1 to 2 percent in Germany.
In both
countries there were declines in industrial production in the first
quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You think they were both positive anyway?

MR. TRUMAN. On the assumption that the nontraded goods
component of the GNP continued to expand.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. JOHNSON.
than that.

Is that in keeping with what their estimate is?
I would think in both cases it is.
I thought Germany had a more optimistic outlook

-3-

5/20/86

were;

MR. TRUMAN. Well, it's short of what their expectations
there's increasing evidence from--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they had a more optimistic outlook
Recently, I think they have
earlier; there's no doubt about that.
been very concerned about how low [their GNP] may have been in the
first quarter.
Ted, if you ranked policies around the world-MR. STERN(?).
at least in the United States, Japan and Germany--would we still be
the most expansionary?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, on the fiscal policy side, certainly,
although it depends on what you crank in for Gramm-Rudman. But in
both of those countries we're seeing a continuing move toward fiscal
On the monetary
restraint, a continuation of a 4- or 5-year trend.
side, for Germany in any case, they are substantially above their
They were aiming for 5-1/2 percent in
monetary growth [objective].
April and it was a little above 8 percent. That's one of the things
that Sam referred to that they are concerned about and one of the
things conditioned to their position in the EMS, which is restraining
It's a little
them from providing more stimulus on the monetary side.
The
hard to read the monetary part in the short run [in Japan].
Japanese really have moved toward a more expansionary monetary posture
over the course of the first five months of this year.
MR. CROSS.

Every time they--

MR. TRUMAN. Their monetary growth dipped down in April, but
they too have been a bit concerned about the excessive monetary
growth.
MR. BLACK. But if you look back a little farther, Ted, you
wouldn't say that they had been as stimulative as we have been,
though, would you?
This is just recently.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, for most of the period up until very
recently they were following a very tight monetary policy largely
directed at keeping the yen from depreciating too much; there was a
lot of pressure on them not to ease monetary policy because that would
cause the yen to depreciate.
MR. CROSS.
But they have changed the discount rate; they
have lowered it 3 times and each time the yen has risen.
MR. JOHNSON. How do you think Germany will respond to such
low first-quarter estimates, given the fact that even they, as you
said, already have made it clear that even if they wanted to do
something they're sort of boxed in by the French franc in the EMS?
MR. TRUMAN. Well, there is some talk that if it comes in low
and the government does poorly in the elections in the second week of
June--the second Sunday in June, I guess--that there might be some
I think that has a low probability, but it
easing on the fiscal side.
is a possibility, I think.
MR. JOHNSON.

What do you mean by easing on the fiscal side?

5/20/86

MR. TRUMAN. Well, I've been told that there are some modest
fiscal expansionary measures--public works projects and so forth and
They have a national election in January and the implications
so on.
of this June election are that they have enough time to move--to ease
a bit to stimulate the economy if they're concerned--which I think is
a very big "if."
One of the problems in interpreting those election
results, as Sam mentioned, is that they are going to be contaminated
by Chernobyl. So there would be less of a mandate than one might want
in the circumstances.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

A slightly different form of

fallout!
MR. MORRIS. We seem to have a worldwide phenomenon of rapid
monetary growth associated with slow real growth; it's not purely
American.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

This is true at the moment.

Worldwide velocity problems!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

In more extreme form here.

These measures aren't worth
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes.
much, but if you use any kind of conventional measure of real interest
rates, the United States right now is probably very much on the low
side of real interest rate countries around the world.
If you use an
ex-post measure of inflation, who knows what real interest rates are?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Sternlight.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
Any questions?

MS. SEGER. Peter, do you sense that commercial banks have
Or
cashed in a lot of their paper profits in their bond holdings?
have they just been playing it by ear and taking their time?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
I think there has been some move to capture
profits on some longer-term investments and to move somewhat shorter
I think they're staying invested, though-in the yield curve.
MS. SEGER.
invested but--

Oh, I didn't mean that they're weren't staying

MR. STERNLIGHT.
--especially given fairly weak loan demand.
And that also would be characteristic.
MS. SEGER.

How about their trading accounts?

How are they

running?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, they have been taking their lumps
recently as market prices have moved down. There are some loss
situations around--nothing super heavy among the bank dealers that I'm
familiar with, but there are some adverse experiences.
MS. SEGER.

Thank you.

5/20/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the transactions.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS. SEGER.

We have to ratify

Any other questions?
So moved.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Without objection.

Mr. Kichline.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

MR. PARRY. Did that revision in the first quarter make you
somewhat more pessimistic about the second quarter in terms of
inventories?
MR. KICHLINE. Not much. We had available all of the data
except for retail trade inventories when we put the forecast together,
The Commerce
and they came in significantly higher than we thought.
Department will release tomorrow the detail on how it fits together,
We really were [not] surprised, frankly. We
so we have much of this.
thought, given the degrees of freedom that they have in that area,
that they might not have taken all of the implied revision into
account; but our reading of the inventory side was that inventories
generally were lean, with the exception perhaps of some major retail
So, we would not want to change very much as a result
trade [firms].
of this.
MR. BLACK.

Jim, do you have the numerical figure on final

sales?
They
MR. KICHLINE. Final sales had been minus 0.4 percent.
But I should give you another number:
are now minus 0.7 percent.
final sales excluding CCC purchases, because they are the big mover.
If you exclude the Commodity Credit Corporation operations they had
been rising 2.6 percent and now they are indicated to have risen 2.2
percent. The changes in these final sales are really quite small.
Personal consumption expenditures, net exports, and residential
structures were revised down, each by a small amount.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. CCC is way down in the first quarter on
these estimates, but is that still positive?
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, it's just much less positive than before.
The offset shows up in federal purchases, of course, if the accounts
Federal purchases were up 23 percent at an annual
are kept straight.
rate in the fourth quarter and are now indicated to have declined 30
percent in the first quarter.
MR. JOHNSON.
Or was it both?

Which side of the trade account was revised?

MR. KICHLINE.
Imports were less negative and exports were
So the contribution of net exports is a little
revised down a bit.
less than had been projected before.
MR. PARRY. Jim, with regard to the forecast, if one were to
assume tax reform roughly similar to the Packwood proposal, given the
difference in timing between the elimination of exemptions and the

5/20/86

effectiveness of the lower tax rates, how would that affect your
estimates of real growth in 1987?
MR. KICHLINE. I think we were asked that question yesterday
[at the Board meeting] and I suggested after a long answer that I
don't know. Do you want the short answer or the long answer?
MR. PARRY.

A short one will do.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess we can take whatever
comments people have on the business outlook generally. Mr. Parry.
MR. PARRY. My view about the outlook is very similar to that
presented by Jim, both in terms of real growth and also inflation.
I
would also agree that the dichotomy between what appear to be very
favorable fundamental factors and the current sluggish performance of
the economy clearly persists. However, in one area--the dollar--it
would appear as though the favorable fundamentals for growth have
improved, as Sam indicated. The dollar is now 6 to 7 percent less
than it was in early April when we last met.
On the other hand, I
feel as though the current greater likelihood of tax reform indicates
that fiscal policy may move in the direction of somewhat greater
restraint than we have in our forecast and perhaps in Jim's as well.
In the Twelfth District we feel as though there are
convincing signs of improvement.
Southern California appears to be in
the midst of a broadly based expansion, with particular strength in
residential construction.
In the Pacific Northwest, the forest
products industry is posting its best performance in several years,
with prices of some products up 22 percent over year-ago levels. The
semiconductor industry is improving somewhat and strengthening orders
for commercial aircraft have benefited companies such as Boeing in
Seattle as well as many subcontractors in California. Finally, lower
gasoline prices and concerns about terrorism abroad are expected to
boost tourism revenues very substantially, especially in the Northwest
with the added draw of Canada's Expo.
Just as an aside, we know from
an Alaskan banker that there isn't a room available in Anchorage for
the entire summer as a result of the pickup in tourism activity. So
cancel that city from your list. Areas heavily dependent on
agriculture and energy continue to suffer, however.
In California,
drilling and rig activity are down very sharply and Alaska has been
particularly hard hit.
Estimates are that each dollar decline in oil
prices costs the state of Alaska about $150 million in revenue loss.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Conditions in our part of the Midwest also are
very largely unchanged from the last meeting. There is that general
expectation that the third and fourth quarters will be significantly
improved, but I must say the current level of activity is considerably
under those expectations. As always, the areas that have been strong
continue to be strong.
I note particularly the real estate side,
which is growing very, very rapidly pretty much across the board. And
that, of course, pervades all of the related activities such as
materials manufacturers, suppliers, and the like.
Office building in
the suburban Chicago area is beginning to slow down, but in the
downtown Chicago area the projects are being completed and new
projects are under way; I am quite surprised by the continuation of

5/20/86

the heavy building in the commercial office building area. On the
residential side in our District--and I guess this is typical of many
parts of the country--over the last three months new permits for
housing starts are up by some 40 percent over a similar period last
year.
So housing starts are growing very, very rapidly.
Alternatively, on the weak side, there is no really
significant improvement in heavy manufacturing. Almost surprisingly,
the decline in the dollar has not yet worked its way through in terms
of a substantial pickup in orders and production. The environment is
better, I am told, but in terms of actually getting deals it has not
been much of a help. An exception to this is the paper board/paper
box industry which is growing very, very rapidly; their order books
early this year--in February, really--on the export side began to take
off.
So, they are exporting very heavily and that has been helpful.
First, on
On the inflation side, I have two comments.
pricing: Everybody I have talked to says that the pricing in the
They are
marketplace pretty much across the board is very fierce.
just unable to get price increases to stick in any significant way.
Contracts
The labor side is consistent with what Jim has suggested.
are continuing to be negotiated on very favorable terms: three-year
contracts, with good changes in the work rules and improvement on the
benefits side, so that unit labor costs seem to be under pretty good
So, in an inflation sense, the outlook looks pretty good.
control.
Net, our outlook is consistent with the staff forecast; but having
said that we would be pleased to see the whites of the eyes of the
third- and fourth-quarter numbers because they look a little remote
right now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. Like the previous three speakers and like the
staff, our forecast is for a pickup in the economy in the second half.
But in fact we find the present situation disquieting. There is, of
course, no evidence today of this pickup and in fact it may be
I still believe that the past favorable developments will
postponed.
show through in the economy, but sometimes I worry that maybe they
have already shown through in part in the numbers we are seeing right
now and that we will see less of a pickup than we all are forecasting.
I certainly would feel better if we were seeing movement in something
besides the housing numbers.
Like other parts of the country, we are seeing good housing
I remind myself that under normal
numbers in our District.
conditions, if I saw these kinds of economic statistics after such a
long economic expansion, I normally would not be hopeful about the
future. But the incoming employment numbers keep me somewhat more
If I have special concerns today, I think they
hopeful, perhaps.
On the
center around the trade numbers and the inventory numbers.
trade side we expect a turnaround, and I would say that the business
community expects a turnaround. In the Fourth District the business
community, in spite of flat performance, is quite optimistic on the
trade turnaround side and on the overall economic outlook.
I do find,
however, that there is beginning to be a difference between the
expectations of the business community and of some of the economists I
talk to who are beginning to be discouraged, particularly on the trade
number, and who are talking about the need for the foreign exchange

5/20/86

On the inventory side, of course, good
rate to go down further.
inventory numbers depend very much on what business expectations are.
And I am concerned that, if this positive business mood I see begins
to slip, we may then be in for an inventory correction. While I think
our patience will be tested over the next several months, I remain
optimistic about the second half; but with each passing month I grow
more uncertain about it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, we all seem to be pretty much of
like mind this morning. In view of what we know now, I guess that is
not unpredictable. We wouldn't have any difference at all with the
staff's forecast for the balance of this year. Our guess would be-and of course it's purely a guess--that if in fact we do achieve those
figures, we might be moving a little more strongly as we go into next
year than the staff has projected, but just a tad more than what they
are saying. I am somewhat cheered by the feeling that inflation will
be down over this period, but I do think that we might justifiably
have some concern about the sharp rise in the price of nonfuel imports
That was not the first quarter in which
in the first quarter of 1986.
It is pointed out in the Greenbook, page 21 in
that has taken place.
the second part, that this could be a first step in the inflationary
feedback we might expect from the substantial depreciation in the
That is something
dollar that we have had over the last year or so.
that I think bears watching.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, the situation in the
Southeast is not very different from that expressed by other speakers.
On average in most sectors of the [District] economy and in most
geographical areas there has been increasing strength in the first
quarter and presumably through the second quarter as well. The
notable exception, of course, is Louisiana. Generally, residential
construction is quite strong in the Southeast as a result of lower
Refinancing has gone on at a very, very
mortgage interest rates.
Commercial construction--and I should say it's really
rapid rate.
industrial construction--also is moving ahead rather strongly. There
has been a shift from commercial development to industrial park
development because of the high vacancy rates in commercial
Tourism also has improved as you might expect; and the
developments.
expectation is that that's going to continue with the canceling of
trips to Europe.
Parenthetically, Eastern Airlines had anticipated
adding--or perhaps they already had--one flight from Miami to Madrid;
but that has been cancelled completely because of the lack of
So, in general those
Consumer spending increased in March.
bookings.
sectors appear to be very good.
It now has
As I indicated, the big exception is Louisiana.
the highest unemployment rate in the United States at a little over 13
The rig count is the lowest since 1975 and the situation
percent.
One of our directors reported that the
there is really quite serious.
only happy person in the state of Louisiana is Governor Edwards after
The situation with respect to oil and energy has spread
the trial.
into the Gulf Coast areas of Alabama and Mississippi, which are also
involved in those [activities], so that's going to be a negative area
It's a difficult
In agriculture there is not very much new.
as well.

5/20/86

situation and that situation has been exacerbated by the very severe
drought that we have experienced--the worst drought, apparently, in
over a hundred years.
I have already talked about commercial real
estate.
On the inflation side, we still get sporadic reports about
price increases due to the decline in the value of the dollar, mostly
in terms of Japanese goods.
But those reports are very sporadic and
there really is not very much evidence that the decline in the
exchange value has worked its way into higher prices at this point.
Wage negotiations continue to be moderate, although inflation in a
couple of our cities like Miami and Atlanta is a bit above the
national average.
In general, the feeling around the District seems
to be one of optimism--again, with the exception of Louisiana. People
are looking for a strong second half and they are looking for a good
1987.
More generally, we agree entirely with the staff forecast.
While the evidence is not yet in the statistics, we think that all of
the fundamentals are in the pipeline--lower interest rates and all of
the other things that we have talked about--to give us the kind of
growth that the staff is forecasting for the second half of the year.
We have no quarrel with that and we also agree with the inflation
number.
So in general, with the few exceptions that I noted, the
Southeast looks pretty good and we think that we are going to get the
kind of growth that the staff is forecasting throughout the nation in
the second half of the year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, our picture is a little
different in that it is not looking too good. Economic activity is
declining. The data for the first quarter show that while the decline
has been modest it certainly is widespread. We expect the
deterioration to be more severe in this quarter and also in the third
quarter.
The energy sector has been referred to already; of course,
it has been very hard hit. The rig count is the lowest since WWII.
The employment in that area, though, has not come down quite as much
as one would have anticipated; it was down about 7 percent in March so
our view is that we still have a lot more of that coming as we go
along. Oil prices have come back a little, but it doesn't seem that
the increase, at least yet, is enough to give drillers much
encouragement. We would anticipate that prices probably could turn
back down as we get on past summer.
Construction is continuing to
subside, particularly on the nonresidential side. The value of
contracts has been sliding for several months.
Employment has
remained pretty strong and in fact is about at historically high
levels in nonresidential construction; so here again we expect to see
a sizable reduction in the work force as the projects come off and
there are no new ones that are going to be replacing them. Other
sectors of our economy are stagnant or declining. Manufacturing is
affected by the weakness of energy and construction, and agriculture
continues to do poorly. The financial position of many of our farmers
also has been weakened further by the decline in oil prices because
they are not getting the royalty payments from the oil wells that they
have on their farms. Residential construction has been holding up
fairly well but we would be more comfortable, as far as our financial

5/20/86

institutions are concerned, if multi-family construction would drop
off a bit.
In sum, Mr. Chairman, we just are not really seeing very much
on the positive side in the Eleventh District. We share part of
Louisiana--the part that Mr. Forrestal doesn't have--and he reported
how that state is doing. New Mexico we share with the Tenth District
and that is not doing all that great either. So, we are a little
negative.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer, you will improve the spirits.

I will have to try to offset
MR. MELZER. That's right.
As was reported last month--and this is somewhat dated, but
this.
right now what we have for the District are first-quarter data--there
is really strength across the board in terms of employment,
construction, and consumer spending. Our District has been growing at
a rate considerably in excess of the rate nationally. We have had
particular strength in non-ag employment, including manufacturing
employment, and also in residential construction. Also, in general in
our area I think the commercial overbuilding is occurring at a later
date, so we would still anticipate strength in commercial construction
through this year with perhaps some slowing next year.
Just talking to people in terms of what's happening on a more
current basis, I sense that the tone is very good in terms of
One specific piece of anecdotal information: A retailer I
attitudes.
talked to some weeks ago expressed some confusion as to why furniture
and consumer durable sales weren't really following the strength we
have seen in housing, which normally is expected. There is now some
evidence in a couple of the major cities in the District that those
areas are beginning to pick up.
In my mind, one of the most significant developments in this
I have
intermeeting period has been the shift in market psychology.
just focused on the government bond market, and I think there probably
I guess the good news might
is some good news and bad news in that.
be that market participants, broadly speaking, may be somewhat more
confident in their outlook about this forthcoming strength in the
I would agree with what has been said about this dichotomy
economy.
we have had in the current outlook and looking down the road for some
I think there is some evidence in the bond market, anyway;
strength.
I guess it's expressed in the form of concern that perhaps that in
The troublesome aspect of all of this is
fact is going to develop.
I think it
what it might imply in terms of inflationary expectations.
was noted in Peter's report and in Sam's, to some extent, that there
could be a psychology emerging whereby the best is behind us in terms
of oil price declines. We are beginning to feel the impact of the
decline of the dollar on prices, and perhaps we'll be moving into a
period of cyclical recovery and have price pressures arising out of
that.
In connection with that we have had a steepening of the yield
curve between the front end and the long/intermediate end of roughly
There is always the possibility that this is
25 to 50 basis points.
just congestion or indigestion from a large supply of securities,
although all through this period we haven't really seen any supply
I think it's significant to note this shift.
problem showing through.

5/20/86

There is one other point related to the market: I attended
the meeting of the Committee on Investment Performance about a week
ago and it was interesting how many investment advisers--I would say
at least three, maybe four, and these tended to be more stock-oriented
people--cited one of the very positive factors in their minds in terms
of the outlook for the markets in general was the liquidity that was
in the economy.
I think they were referring very specifically in that
context to what they perceived to be a generally accommodative
monetary policy. The question that raises in my mind is: If the
feeling develops that maybe the major move is behind us and the
financial markets people start to shift some of that liquidity into
spendable balances--and in fact start to spend it against a backdrop
of maybe some expectation of increasing prices--we could possibly be
at a point where some of that liquidity that has been going into the
economy gets pulled out for spending. That's just a question at this
point, though.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just inject a question here. There
have been a number of references to what favorable wage performances
are signaling, which I certainly think has been true in the
manufacturing or goods-producing side of the economy. However, that's
a minority of the economy these days.
What do you see going on in the
service side where wages and salaries have been relatively high?
Is
there any improvement there?
MR. MELZER.
I might comment on that.
I think there is an
expectation that the rates of increase will be lower this year than we
experienced last year but still will be on the order of maybe 5
percent, down from 6 percent or something like that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. On the national level, I think the issue has
been stated as the dichotomy between the strength of the fundamentals
and what that says about the outlook versus the sluggishness
currently. The issue is how patient we will be to wait for those
fundamentals [to show through].
As I look down the list of monthly
indicators, while there is no strong evidence, I see a few straws in
the wind. For example: the retail sales figure in April showed an
increase that was the best since December; the housing start increase
was the best since January; the industrial production increase was the
best since January; the nonfarm payroll employment increase was the
best since January; the [unintelligible] increase was the best since
December. Now, that does not make a trend but I think there is a
message there that maybe at the fringes we're beginning to see some
evidence that [the expansion] might be picking up and that the lull in
February and March may be behind us.
As far as my own District goes, we are better off than the
nation.
Philadelphia has an unemployment rate of 5-1/2 percent; it is
lower in New Jersey and lower than that in Delaware.
I was struck
last weekend, as I was driving around running some errands, by the
number of help wanted signs in the various store windows.
So, I think
the area is doing well. The attitude among business people is that
they feel this lull but that the situation is really pretty good in
the lull.
Their attitude is positive; I wouldn't say it's robust. We
feel the same boom in tourism: the Jersey shore, the Delaware shore,
and the Poconos Resort areas are overbooked, if anything.

-12-

5/20/86

As to the question about wages in the services sector, last
year I think the increases were running around 5-3/4 to 6 percent
generally and in the financial area they were probably 6 to 6-1/2
percent.
I would think it would be a touch lower, maybe broadly in
the 5-1/2 to 6 percent area or perhaps a bit lower; but those markets
are still fairly strong.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, in the way of a description, I would start
off by saying that the two-tiered economy or whatever term you want to
use that has characterized our District for a long time continues to
do so.
Agriculture and the small part of the energy sector that we
have continue to be under some significant pressures, and certainly
that has spilled over into small-town retail trade and real estate,
and so forth. Most of the rest of the District, though, continues to
do well--unspectacular, but reasonably well. Expansion is fairly
generalized in the rest of the sectors. What struck me between this
meeting and the last one is that attitudes really seem quite good;
I know many of you like to
they are distinctly on the positive side.
keep in touch with some of the more obscure parts of your Districts
One indication of the positive attitudes
and we have obscure parts.
is that second home sales in northern Minnesota--in the Minnesota
That
Lakes areas--have really picked up in the last few months.
business is just doing very, very well in places like Brainerd and
Pequot Lakes, some of those kinds of locations.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There are too many people going into
these areas of Alaska and northern Minnesota now. They're going to

take all the fish out of there!
MR. STERN. The second homes sales report was really quite
striking to me, because I think it is indicative of some of the
activity and the attitudes that exist in some of the more remote parts
of the District now, actually northeastern Minnesota. Despite the
problems, the Iron Range is undergoing something of a renaissance at
the moment.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're not very good at manufacturing but
we are really good at second homes!
MR. STERN. Apparently, yes. More fundamentally, I think the
economy is likely to perform largely along the lines of the Greenbook
forecast, although my own hunch is that we will probably get somewhat
more growth, in real terms, in the second half of this year and early
next year. But as time goes on, there is at least the risk--and I
have some concern about it--that the mix will shift and will
deteriorate in favor of more rapid price increases and less real
growth. I must say that the tax reform proposal does strike me as
something of a wild card, although presumably that front-loading
issue--thinking about it in some form of permanent income context-ought not to be a big factor. At least that's where I come out. I do
worry that as the expansion goes on--if we get the kind of
acceleration in real growth that I think we will--that will in some
sense start to sow the seeds, or at least raise the risks, of a
pronounced deterioration in price performance over time. What is
happening on the import price side right now and the state of

5/20/86

-13-

liquidity in the economy are probably some of the straws already in
the wind.
As far as your question about service sector wages, I don't
But I will say that, at
have any first-hand information on that.
least in the Twin Cities, the help wanted signs in those kinds of
establishments are very prominent and have been for quite some time.
I would infer from that, at least, that there will be some continued
upward pressure on wages as a consequence.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.
I just want to make two brief [observations].
I generally agree with what has been said so far on the staff's
forecast, although there are a couple of areas on which I differ a
I am generally optimistic; I do see things picking up in the
little.
second half of the year. But I think we are going to be disappointed
on the trade side. What I keep seeing in Europe and Japan indicates
to me that we are going to get less growth out of the rest of the
industrial world than we had been expecting and, therefore, our export
markets are just not going to be there as strongly as we had
anticipated. So, to the extent that we built that into our GNP
estimates, I think it is not going to materialize as strongly as we
might have thought.
I do think things are going to look better
domestically, although not as strong on our export side as we might
have hoped.
My other concern is that velocity, or the demand for money,
still seems to be a major factor.
I think a lot of this is a
carryover from the sharp decline in interest rates we have had and
from the oil price situation, which has broken inflationary
expectations another small notch. So we're having an increase in
demand for other checkable deposits as a result. Just yesterday the
staff was indicating that velocity growth has been around minus 9
percent for the second quarter. That is really a hefty decline, so
I
we're on a similar--if not even sharper--trend than last year.
expect that to turn around a good bit in the second half of the year,
but it has a lot of turning around to do.
My expectation would be
that this velocity weakness will probably squeeze nominal GNP a little
further, so I am relatively optimistic about it.
I hope that comes
more out of the inflation side than the real GNP side;`but given what
is going on and my expectation on the trade side, I think that we
probably will see a lower nominal GNP performance and maybe some sort
of balanced squeezing between inflation and real GNP in the second
half.
But once again, I think there is reason to be encouraged.
I
just think we are going to be disappointed on the trade side because
Japan and Germany don't seem to be willing to pursue the kind of
stimulative policies that we might like.
I am talking about the fact
that they have slack and potential from the oil price declines because
they are major importers; I am not talking about demand driven type
policies.
They have a lot of potential and a lot of slack. Even if
they are willing, they have some problems--institutional problems that
[make them] resist being more stimulative. Germany, as I said, is
boxed in by the EMS; they are at the bottom on the currency
[arrangement] so they are in danger of falling outside their range if
they try to get rates lower unless France goes along. Japan seems to

5/20/86

be resisting lower interest rates through their postal saving system
and there are a lot of other institutional areas of resistance.
I
think they are eventually going to adjust; they are just going to be
slow to adjust.
I think political pressures will be brought to bear
after the elections in Germany, but hopefully it won't be the wrong
kind of expansion.
I am a little troubled by the idea of a public
works project as a fiscal stimulus--being the source of expansion.
I
think they will be slow to adjust.
I think our trade sectors are
going to come around slowly.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You talked about the trade sector. Just
looking at these figures, the staff has a pretty healthy decline in
the trade balance over the next 18 months. Would you explain that,
Mr. Truman?
MR. JOHNSON.

That's what I was getting at.

MR. TRUMAN. We are expecting, with the help of some growth
abroad and the lagged effects of exchange rate change, to see a rather
pronounced impact in terms of slowing of imports.
Imports will
continue to rise in nominal terms and we expect a rise in exports, so
I think as far as the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What kind of rise in exports do you have?

MR. TRUMAN. Just in terms of the trade balance itself, we
have nominal imports rising at a 12-1/2 percent annual rate over the
four quarters of 1986 and nonagricultural exports rising at a 12-1/2
percent annual rate over the four quarters of this year. We had a 16
percent annual rate, we think, in the first quarter.
So the balance
is somewhat lower, 3 percent a quarter. For non-petroleum imports, we
are looking for small declines--maybe in the 2 to 4 percent annual
rate range for the balance of the year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You actually have declines in the rates?

MR. TRUMAN.
In nonagricultural, non-oil, imports.
On the
oil side, we had a big drop in the first quarter and we will get quite
a big snapback for three reasons: one, just the variability of the
numbers and the big drop in the first quarter when they were
rebuilding; second, gasoline and energy consumption are going up; and
third, domestic production is going down. So there is quite a push on
the quantity side of the import side in the short run--less in the way
of a nominal trade balance than we would have-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
production?

How do you measure a decline in domestic

MR. TRUMAN. It is very hard to estimate these things.
I'll
look it up and will give you at least an accurate estimate. We have
something on the order of several hundred--I am not sure whether it is
[unintelligible]-MR. ANGELL.

Are these data coming in or are they a forecast?

MR. TRUMAN.
It's a forecast.
We have domestic production
going down by 300,000 barrels a day over the four quarters of 1986.

5/20/86

already in the notion of what these countries are able to do.
And I
think we have to begin to look more at this impact [unintelligible].
But the possible pressures that may occur in some countries, including
the [major] ones--not from one year to the next but over several
years--could begin to [present a different] and more difficult picture
of these outcomes.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's turn to Mr. Kohn and get the
monetary side of the equation, and then have a doughnut.
MR. KOHN.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just raise one question that I
raised yesterday, which you probably don't have any answer for at this
point.
You mentioned the great liquidity in the economy; some other
people have mentioned that.
Yet, if you look at our liquid assets
series, it hasn't been doing much. Can you explain that dichotomy?
MR. KOHN. I think there are two things that explain it.
If
you look at the components, you can see that this must be a seasonal
adjustment problem more than anything else.
Short-term Treasury
securities, which were very strong in November and December, have been
running off on balance in this seasonally adjusted series in 1986.
Now, the Treasury clearly has continued to rely on coupons for most of
its financing but I don't believe there has been a change in its basic
financing pattern here.
So, L was stronger in the fourth quarter of
last year than it is now, and it's partly I think-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the Treasury is issuing.

Basically a phenomenon of how many bills

MR. KOHN. Well, the Treasury has been paying bills down a
bit, about $400 [million] an auction over the last couple of auctions.
the U.S.

MR. ANGELL.
residents--

Is it the number?

He should have the number on

MR. KOHN. Well, this would be the number of short-term
Treasury securities owned by [unintelligible].
MR. ANGELL.
Consequently, if you had an increase in foreign
holdings, that would result in a reduction.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If there was a big change, yes.

MR. MORRIS.
But I think if you look at the trend in total
liquid assets in the last two years, the trend is down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MORRIS.

Yes,

I know.

So, I don't think you can explain those two

years-MR. KOHN. No, the other
is the runoff in commercial paper
bankers' acceptances were weak in
shift to longer-term financing by
bonds and issuing less short-term

phenomenon that I was going to note
this year. Partly we're seeing that
March and partly we're seeing the
businesses.
They are issuing more
paper. And the public is shifting

5/20/86

something about it now. And I don't know if I have the courage to go,
in terms of tightening monetary policy, to where it ought to be
tightened if that staff forecast is correct.
So, I'm in a real
dilemma.
I just can't feel any satisfaction in being a participant in
But I
a monetary policy that might lead to those kinds of results.
guess I want to see the whites of the eyes of this third-quarter
recovery; and if it's there, then I think we might have to take some
action.
I'm somewhat more optimistic on prices, but I don't trust
myself against the rest of you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I'd just like to join the
general agreement that has been expressed around the table that the
staff forecast is right--that the current economic indicators are
mixed and that the current sluggishness that we seem to be seeing will
give way to acceleration in the second half. But I suppose the main
question is: What would be the timing of the acceleration and the size
of it?
I myself would expect that we will see this acceleration
sooner rather than later--that is to say, that we'll certainly see
some strong evidence of it in the third quarter rather than the fourth
quarter. And I would expect the acceleration to be strong rather than
moderate. I also share some of the concerns expressed around the
table that, with the likely increase in import prices and the
acceleration that I anticipate, we may begin to see some inflationary
pressures emerging but not in the near term. I would be concerned
about the possibility of inflation much farther out into the second
half of 1987.
But my concerns would be there and I think that's a
On that I would see the risks
factor we should not lose sight of.
pretty predominantly on the up side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If nobody else has any comments--

MR. FORRESTAL. I might just go back, Mr. Chairman, to your
question about wages. When I mentioned wages and prices in the
Southeast I had in mind manufacturing; in the services sector we're
looking at 5-1/2 to 6 percent increases, but substantially higher in
the financial services area.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I haven't heard a lot of concern
expressed--although there has been some--about the impact of this tax
bill on commercial construction, which is in a vulnerable position
anyway we keep saying. A couple of people have mentioned it but they
didn't put enormous emphasis on it.
I don't know.
MR. PARRY. It should be substantial in terms of changes in
depreciation regulations.
Also, for rentals I think the maximum loss
one can write off is $25,000, which is not very large.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There is certainly a change in the tax
incentives for all these partnerships and so forth.
I don't
understand it all, but it's a big change.
MR. WALLICH. May I say a word?
The [forecast for] the
United States seems entirely plausible but it might be quite different
from what many objective viewers think, and I think we have to take
more account of [unintelligible].
If we don't, we're going to get an
increase in the negative trade [unintelligible].
We're seeing it now

5/20/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what business or who they are
attracting! Governor Angell.
MR. ANGELL. The world economy still seems to have a fairly
high saving rate.
I keep thinking about the fact that the economies
with the higher saving rates over the last 4 or 5 years have also been
growing the fastest; they have gotten larger.
In addition to that, if
you take the exchange rate move in dollar terms, the Japanese saving
rate gets to be a lot larger than it was when you translate it in yen
terms. And then when you add the oil recycling and redistribution,
that seems to redistribute income to areas where the saving rates
remain high. At the same time, I keep thinking about all the
investment spending that was spurred in the 1970s when oil prices were
rising. Everyone was building tankers and pipelines and nuclear
plants and hydro-electric facilities, and these are all long-term
kinds of investment demand.
It was not just one country; it was a
world-wide phenomenon. But we don't have that left anymore; all we
have left to do is build buildings and aircraft.
So it doesn't seem
to me that there's much to indicate that the world economy is going to
be moving forward with all that much vigor. World prices seem to be
dominated by the fact that there are people out there, particularly in
the Third World, who are trying to get hold of dollars and want those
dollars.
I think the world may see enough supplies in agricultural
commodities that I don't see much of a bright outlook in regard to the
U.S. share of the agricultural world in time to do much help in this
decade.
So it seems to me that what Jerry Corrigan and Manley Johnson
talked about in regard to the exports is rather doubtful. The United
States is still the largest exporter in the world. And I think it's
going to be a very difficult market to compete in. The people that
had those trade surpluses aren't going to give them up very easily
because they don't want to take the employment drops that would occur
So, I think
if they gave up their balance of trade surplus positions.
there's going to be a very significantly competitive market. Maybe we
will make some gains in regard to reducing our imports, but not
So, [the
everybody can do that and a lot of countries are trying.
foreign sector] seems to be a drag as far as I can see.
Corporate profits released this morning seem somewhat
disappointing again. That indicates that the stock market may be more
interest rate driven rather than anything else.
I don't know what
that has to show. I would note, when you look at housing prices in

Boston and Tokyo, that it really is rather difficult in a mobile world
for housing prices to get too high in one area compared to another
because it does translate, eventually I presume, into higher wage
rates. We hope you'll pay higher rates in Boston and drive those
firms out of that area and into other parts of the United States; it

would be really welcomed. I don't know that we necessarily have to
move Texas to Boston, but it's really difficult to go a long time with
one area of the country having a rather significant revival and other
areas of the country having very bad [times].
If market forces work,
we can expect land prices to adjust and housing prices to adjust and
wage rates to be more attractive somewhere else. So I'm really
pleased to see that.
My real difficulty at this moment is that the staff forecast
for the 1987 inflation rate just scares me to death. Maybe it's
wishful thinking that it's not going to be there. But if it is, it's
way too high.
If we're going to do anything about it, we ought to do

5/20/86

firms, even in manufacturing, are doing reasonably well to quite well.
But the very, very large firms--mostly ones headquartered in New York
with operations all over the country and the world--still are
stumbling, with one prominent exception and that bears on the point
somebody else made earlier. We do get reports from
that their consumer-related appliances--refrigerators
and that kind of thing--are now really very strong. "Full-out" is the
So that bears on this feedthrough
way it's being described to me.
In New York City itself, office
effect from the housing side.
buildings are very strong. In the suburban New York areas, I think we
have precisely the same situation that Frank mentioned in Boston in
that there is something close to an outright boom going on in terms of
the housing market and housing prices particularly. Some of that
unquestionably is a reflection of the fact that for better or worse,
and I guess it's for better, the financial side of the economy in New
York City itself--not just banking, but the whole ball of wax--is
throwing off just a tremendous amount of income. Wages and salaries
in that area are growing very rapidly, but the standard wage bill
People will tell you about salary
doesn't begin to capture it.
increases of 6 to 7 percent, but what has happened is that various
forms of incentive compensation and bonus compensation are now
widespread. They were once largely the domain of the investment banks
but now they are everywhere. And the payouts under these various
And as I said, there's no question that in
plans are truly enormous.
a major way that is feeding the frenzy that we see in the housing
market in particular.
In terms of a longer-term outlook, there are a couple of
One is the one that I think Gary Stern
concerns that one hears about.
and Tom Melzer mentioned: that while the inflation outlook right now
and for the foreseeable future is terrific, what might it be out
somewhere in 1987 in a context in which the economy is very strong,
import prices are feeding through, and the beneficial effects on
The other concern
prices of the oil situation are largely behind us?
that one hears more and more about--and I guess this is a bit of a
problem coming out of the closet--is a concern that basically says
that maybe these go-go financial markets have gotten a little too much
go-go in them. The concern is not just in terms of prices but in
terms of all the exotic activities and the implied uncertainties and
risks associated with these various patterns of behavior; it's a kind
of nagging feeling that there are vulnerabilities there that perhaps
are not fully understood. And that uncertainty, as it can bear on
this financial marketplace broadly defined, I think is getting a great
deal more attention.
In closing, one anecdotal comment: I was poaching in Mr.
Parry's territory Saturday at the [unintelligible] meeting and two
things surprised me.
One was that there was an article on the front
page of the Phoenix paper that said that four of the highest paid
executives in Phoenix were bankers and that two of them were making
over $1 million a year.
I then had occasion to visit one of the new
communities developing way up north of Phoenix. And there around a
golf course, Desert Highlands, were 70--seventy!--houses under
construction. And they start at $1 million.
MS.
executives.

SEGER.

Yes, but they attract a lot of retired

5/20/86

machinery, and oil fuel equipment are all depressed sectors.
Again,
it's a mixed bag. Commercial construction in Kansas City and Omaha
looks very good and suburban Denver is still going pretty strong.
Downtown Denver, Oklahoma City, and Tulsa aren't [unintelligible] like
Houston and perhaps Dallas will be someday. Residential construction
is following that trend; that is to say, in the urban areas in which
there has been low unemployment and good activity--for example, Kansas
City and Denver--residential construction is very, very strong. But
it is severely depressed in Oklahoma, whether it be Tulsa or Oklahoma
City.
One of the things I would like to call attention to, and
Martha has already referred to it, is the revenue shortfalls that are
coming out of this depressed agriculture/energy economy. Oklahoma,
Kansas, Wyoming, and Nebraska all are experiencing shortfalls in
revenues. And this is sort of a double-barreled effect in the sense
that the revenues are not coming in and the states and other
municipalities are looking for revenues and are increasing taxes,
It is impacting those states and
whether sales taxes or otherwise.
will keep them largely depressed--unless some other good events such
as Chernobyl happen, I guess!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a couple of brief comments: On
the general outlook, I find myself in the same ballpark as the staff
I look at the situation right now using that forecast as a
forecast.
benchmark and I guess it's one in which I see some downside risks and
some upside risks; I think they are fairly well balanced. The big
downside risk is the one that Governor Johnson pointed to: the trade
side.
I've looked at those forecasts for the trade accounts by
product, by country, and any other way I can look at them, and I am a
little skeptical that we can see the kind of improvement that I think
is built into most forecasts. The other side of the coin is that if
indeed we begin to see the kind of recovery take hold that is built
into most forecasts--not just Jim's--I think we've got to keep in mind
that it's a forecast in which on balance the growth in consumer
spending is modest in real terms, business fixed investment is
sluggish in real terms, and inventories generally are rather modest.
And the question, of course, is if things start to roll will those
rather modest increases in consumer spending, fixed investment and
So, there are risks
inventories all begin to gain their own momentum?
on both sides and I wouldn't want to try to choose which are the
greater risks.
As a matter of perspective, we either just passed or are
about to pass the 3-1/2-year mark in this expansion. Over the past
year I think we've been a little lucky, in a somewhat curious way, in
that different sectors of the economy have carried the load at various
points and for various periods of time. Right now there's no question
that housing is carrying the load.
I think we've been lucky in some
sense in the way that things have phased in and out and kept the
overall momentum distinctly on the plus side, though not as robust as
perhaps some would wish.
Looking at the situation more from a Second District
perspective, I think a couple of things stand out.
Outside of New
York City itself we really do get the sense that the medium-size

5/20/86

-17-

a severe labor shortage situation because we have a number of new
plants under construction, mostly in the defense/electronics area,
that will have to be manned. If capital spending rises or the
computer industry bounces back and if our exports in this country
rise, we would gain strength from that as well because we export more
of our manufactured products than any other part of the country.
So,
as I see the New England situation, we are heading toward a hyper
fully employed situation. There is a lot of diversity in this country
at the moment, particularly between Mr. Boykin's District and mine.
MR. BLACK. Do you think it would help to relieve the
situation if you took a bunch of Texans up there?
MR. MORRIS.
a place to live.

I think we could import Texans if they can find

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Strangely enough, in far north Dallas I was out
on the weekend and went into 14 houses, brand new, that are on the
market for sale at prices ranging from $475,000 to $800,000.
And they
think they are going to sell them!
MR. BLACK.

Did you settle on yours?

MR. BOYKIN. Oh no, I just like to see what they are doing.
That is way out in the country.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How are land prices doing, Mr. Guffey?

MR. GUFFEY. They are continuing to fall, Mr. Chairman. As
far as agricultural land values, from the survey that we take at the
end of every quarter, they are down another 5 to 6 percent across the
District; that would be roughly 50 percent of their highs in 1981.
With respect to the agricultural sector, the winter wheat crop is in
good shape; it's perhaps a very good crop.
The other plantings that
would take place in the spring are going forward well ahead of the
usual schedule. There are about 5 to 7 percent of agricultural
borrowers that will not get credit this spring and, as a result,
something will have to be done with respect to foreclosure. They will
not be able to put in a crop.
So, there is some good and bad in the
sense that the crop is good and commodity prices are up marginally,
largely because of the Russian disaster.
On the other side of the
coin, red meat prices are down largely because of governmental
programs with respect to the dairy herd buyout which depressed red
meat prices very substantially.
In the energy sector, the story has already been told. What
has happened to Bob Boykin's District has happened to the Tenth
District in spades.
For example, the rig count as of January 1 in the
Tenth District was at 550; in May it was 236. And that [compares with]
a number of about 1700 working rigs in the District at the height of
the oil boom. As far as manufacturing is concerned, again, it's a
mixed picture.
Missouri, as I think you know, is second only to
Michigan in auto assemblies.
Those plants are going full out so that
in the urban areas, particularly Kansas City, things are looking very
good and unemployment is lower than the national average.
On the
other hand, general [unintelligible] aviation aircraft, farm

-16-

5/20/86

1, if maybe we won't have to see some more paring back in the third
quarter because they are at close to 2 million units and that is
probably 400,000 to 500,000 units above where they would like to have
them. Have they taken enough out of production schedules to achieve
Again, I don't know the answers;
that, given the current sales pace?
these are just questions.
MR. KICHLINE. It depends, obviously, on what they do with
their incentives and whether they are going to gin up some more sales
In the GNP sense, in billions
by doing something on the price side.
of dollars, the second-quarter change in the automobile sector is
worth about $15 billion in real terms. We have [projected] another $3
or $4 billion in the third quarter which indicates that, yes, they are
going to have to take more out.
Now, that assumes that they have
already [unintelligible] the working off of current-quarter production
schedules; we think that they will have to do more.
One of the
difficulties that I might note here is that the Commerce Department
But using our
uses seasonal factors that some might doubt.
information, they have their seasonal auto production going from 9
million units in the first quarter to 7.3 million in the second
quarter.
So it's a big dip. And we assume that a small further cut
will occur in the third quarter.
MS. SEGER. Okay. Another thing that has suddenly started to
bug me is the feedback of these weak sectors on the Treasuries of
I
various states and what that may do to their urge to spend.
understand that several states already are noticing the problems with
tax collections.
Is this not something else that could change and
contribute to some sort of drag on the economy?
Also, the revenue
sharing, I believe, is continuing to be attacked here in Washington.
For many states--at least the one I am from--the revenue sharing has
funded many, many different activities.
My final question involves
what Manley was mentioning about trade and how quickly the improvement
will actually show up in the data. My gut reaction is that the lags
I am not disputing
may be longer than any of us would like to see.
your forecast at all; I am just suggesting that maybe these are some
of the matters that could in fact [unintelligible] on it.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, New England remains a fully
employed economy. Our regional unemployment rate is under 4 percent,
despite the sizable decline in employment in the computer industry.
The decline in employment in that industry was more than offset by the
rise in employment in construction and financial services.
As a
consequence of a fully employed state, we find that wages are rising
more rapidly, as you might expect, in New England than in any other
part of the country.
In the financial sector, wages are rising more
than are wages in general; in that sector the average wage increase
this year is probably around 6-1/2 percent. Within the financial
sector, the mutual fund industry is in a boom condition and much of
that is centered in the Boston area. One other fallout of the fully
employed state has been an explosion in housing prices.
Boston real
estate on average is up by 75 percent in the past two years.
And
companies are finding it difficult for the first time to transfer
people into Boston from other parts of the country because of the cost
of housing. We are now at or slightly above the San Francisco housing
market.
The prospects for New England in the year ahead could well be

5/20/86

MR. ANGELL.

Do you have any hard data?

MR. TRUMAN. Well, there are quite a lot.
The production
data lag, but there is a large amount of anecdotal information about
the shutting of stripper wells, which account for some 80,000 barrels
a day of total production in the United States.
MR. ANGELL. Well, it is true that in Kansas they are
shutting wells that are coming in under a half a barrel a day.
find that-MR. TRUMAN. The estimates range from [unintelligible].
you say something like 50 barrels a day at $15 a barrel--

But I

When

MR. PARRY. On the point that you made, Mr. Chairman, about
the reduced growth among our trading partners: Related to that is the
fact that their currencies have appreciated even more, so that in
itself is a factor that may be an offset.
MR. JOHNSON.
I agree that that is something of a favorable
offset.
It is just that the discussion we have had here and
everything I've ever read suggest that the income effect is really
much stronger up front than those exchange rate effects; and the lags
are long on those exchange rate shifts.
It would be some time before
we got an offset from that, if the demands were to fall seriously
behind in Europe and in Japan.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Well, I won't repeat the comments I have heard
about the unevenness, the 2-tiered or 3-tiered [economy] or whatever
it is, and the lots of tears in Dallas.
I agree with the staff
forecast of a pickup in growth in the second half of the year. What I
would like to concentrate on are some question marks that I see-things that may prevent that pickup from happening, even though I
would like to see it happen and I don't know that it won't. One thing
is this whole issue of tax reform. Practically every business person
that I have talked with seems to be discussing that. Last week I
chatted with a homebuilders group.
They had done a survey and it may
be interesting to hear what they concluded--this was based on the
Senate Finance bill--about the impact on the overall economy. The
impact on single-family housing would be positive, but they thought
that the impact on multifamily housing for sale and on rental office
building and commercial and industrial construction would be negative.
And a substantial group thought it would be very negative. Anyhow, it
is impacting on a lot of decision-making and is causing many decisions
to be postponed.
I don't know how that will work out for the rest of
this year--whether in fact it will bring about some extra activity
late in the year.
If we know, for example, that certain changes will
take effect on January 1, maybe we could get a blip late this year
followed by a little hole the beginning of next year.
I just think it
is something to look at.
As Jim said, our econometric models don't
give us good answers as to what this will do, but I think it is worth
considering.
In the auto sector, I believe Jim mentioned that the auto
[production] cutbacks had cost us about 1-1/4 percentage points in
this quarter.
I wonder, given the size of the inventories as of May

5/20/86

its asset holdings from short-term paper into bonds. We see this in
M2 also. M2 has been depressed in part because the public has shifted
into these mutual funds that President Morris has commented on.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
implications or not?

Would you conclude that it had any policy

MR. KOHN. I don't think it has particular policy
implications beyond what you might garner from the fact that M2 is
also running weak in the range--that is, that the buildup in liquidity
broadly measured isn't that large. But it's very, very concentrated
at the very liquid end of the spectrum: in M1 deposits, saving
deposits, MMDAs, and such.
MR. JOHNSON. That trend is consistent with a decline in
inflationary expectations I would think, so you're still left with
that major question about velocity.
MR. PRELL. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to just note that L rather
consistently has grown a little faster than M3 over the past 3 years
and that the first-quarter pattern is the same again. It was one half
percentage point faster over 1983; 1.4 percentage points faster over
1984; 0.8 points faster in 1985; and 0.7 points faster in the first
quarter. So the trend really isn't any different thus far this year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, let's have a break.
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll make a few comments, which may be
more in the nature of a summary.
I must say when I gaze at this table
of the first quarter that Mr. Kichline gave me, if you believe the
numbers--which is a big "if" for many of these quarterly figures--from
one perspective it's quite a remarkable performance to have an
increase in the GNP at a 3.7 percent seasonally adjusted annual rate
during a quarter when federal purchases are going down at a rate of 30
percent and plant and equipment [spending] is going down at 13
percent.
If I recall, those things are temporary; there must have
been some strength elsewhere.
I guess one could raise some questions
about how sustainable the inventory figure is.
But that doesn't seem
to be in accord with what we've been thinking about the economy.
However, if you average the fourth and first quarters, I guess you
have a picture that's more in keeping with what we thought was going
on, or is probably more accurate--a little over 2 percent. We had a
description of a very mixed picture of different sectors of the
economy and different sections of the [country].
Manufacturing
remains somewhat in the doldrums; we have a few excesses developing in
New England and elsewhere in the country in all those financial
operations. When I look at the problems, generally, I'm not sure
there's much that is correctable--looking at it on a world-wide basis
now--by much change in monetary policy. This trade situation that has
been talked about, I think, is a very serious question. But it's hard
to see how it could be corrected by monetary policy in the United
States; maybe it could be corrected by monetary policies in Germany
and Japan. But I'm among those who are a little skeptical unless we
get more growth abroad, because I think that's what's needed to
improve the trade picture.

5/20/86

-24-

I might say a word about the LDCs.
I don't think that's
going at all well at the moment for a variety of reasons, mainly in
Mexico where the political situation has gotten very difficult-stimulated in important ways by expressed American attitudes toward
Mexico with regard to drugs and corruption and all that business.
The
atmosphere is very foul for getting constructive changes in economic
policy. And they're going to run out of money one of these days.
They haven't yet; their reserve positions have been pretty well
maintained, I think, probably by very tight money and exchange rate
changes.
The degree of the tightness of money, at least, probably
isn't very good for their longer term. The economic policy mix is not
very good for what you'd like to see happen constructively over time.
In the political atmosphere I think there is a question as to whether
they will be successful or even want to get their act together to do a
constructive financing. And if they don't do it, there will be very
serious problems in the rest of Latin America. Again, I don't see
that this is susceptible to monetary policy at this point; a moderate
change in interest rates isn't going to do anything for the political
situation, which is the root of the problem.
It has been remarkable, I think, that the domestic financial
pressures in Texas and Oklahoma that should be there aren't very
visible on the surface. We are learning--or we already have learned,
I guess--how to run our savings and loan system without any assets.
We're getting to the point of [learning] how to run a commercial
banking system without any assets. Everything goes on faith. But
again, I don't think there's anything there that's particularly
susceptible to economic policy. We are getting the protectionism
threat coming up again connected with the trade situation. All of
this to some degree bears upon world-wide economic policy, but again,
it's hard to see how it bears very much on monetary policy at the
moment, given what we've done.
I had a little discussion about what the threat of inflation
is.
I find that we pretty consistently have underestimated the
progress against inflation. But when I look at next year and the
possibilities, I find it entirely plausible to say at the least that
the inflation rate would rise quite a lot next year.
I don't think
that's certain; but I just think there are a lot of persistent price
pressures in the service area and that's so big.
One can list a whole
bunch of services where that's true, including financial services and
housing. We're going to get some impact of the dollar [depreciation];
that's icing on the cake.
As for the energy situation, even if
[energy prices] level off, that will be a different picture.
But if
they rebound at all, we will get another aggravation.
I think we've
done remarkably well so far on the goods side of the economy, but
we're not going to have agricultural prices going down forever and
energy prices going down forever.
The basic wage and the basic cost
on the manufacturing side look fine, but it's a pretty hard
[unintelligible] effort on that services side of the economy. What we
could hope for is that if [inflation] did come out around 4 percent or
so--I don't know whether that will be right--but if it's during a
period when we're absorbing the exchange rate change we might have
gotten off cheap. Maybe it will be temporary. To a degree, I think
that's what we've got to work for.
We can't offset that potential
inflation if the economy is strong, but we could work to make it
temporary rather than permanent and hope to see a little more progress
over time on the service side.
I think we've got to look for

5/20/86

protection there from the budgetary action, which I hope comes
forward, and not let the economy get overly exuberant if things go in
that direction. But none of that is certain yet.
On the monetary side I'm told that the preliminary news on
the latest money supply figures is not better; in fact, it's a little
worse. If anything, the May figure looks like it's going to get up
At the least
toward 20 percent instead of anything lower than that.
it's an awkward looking figure. We have said all along, and I would
continue to take the view, that the importance of all these measures
has to be judged in the context of M2 and M3--to look no further than
the monetary aggregates.
They got stronger but they are not so
overwhelmingly strong as M1 in terms of our longer-range targets; they
If they begin leveling off--and
don't look alarming at this point.
their rapid increase is fairly recent and I guess it still doesn't
look like that's going to parallel the semi-explosion in M1 in May.
So I don't know. We have a few tremors; I don't think we have all the
confirming signs on M2 and M3.
I don't want to prejudge things but I get the sense that the
comments heard around the table were not forcibly in the direction of
doing anything particularly to monetary policy at the moment. As we
look out ahead--and maybe not very far ahead--the question of being a
little more restrictive does arise.
I'm not sure that date has come
quite yet.
It would await further evidence on both the monetary side
and on the economy. There we are. What have you got to say for
yourselves?
MR. BLACK.

You pretty well have said it all, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
than that! Mr. Parry.

You've got to be a little more specific

MR. PARRY. I would choose alternative B, which I feel is
consistent with growth of around 3-1/2 percent in 1987 and further
declines in unemployment.
It seems to me that alternative A is not as
desirable because of my concerns about the value of the dollar and its
inevitable inflationary implications.
Also, if we were to choose
alternative A, it would come in the context of already very favorable
fundamental factors; those that we've mentioned would include lower
interest rates, lower oil prices, a value of the dollar that is
considerably lower than expected, and of course, the strong growth in
M1.
Alternative A does not appear to me to be consistent with a goal
of longer-term price stability. Also, at this point I would not favor
"C" because I think it runs the risk of not permitting good growth in
1987.
On the other hand, my concern about the future direction of
inflation and also the persistent strength in Ml would lead me to
favor variant III of the directive. To inform financial markets that
there is concern on our part about the growth of money would seem to
make some sense.
The other point I'd just add parenthetically is that I can
come up with a scenario where M2 and M3 may become somewhat more of a
problem. Over the last 6 months to a year we've seen an awful lot of
money going into mutual funds, stocks, bonds, and municipals, and when
investors believe that the interest rates are going to turn those
funds are going to come back to short-term assets. And if they come
back short, they're going to go into M2 and M3 and we could see much

5/20/86

faster growth in M2 and M3 at that point--primarily as a result of
portfolio shifts.
It would not necessarily indicate that people are
going to be using these [funds] for transaction purposes. But I
wouldn't derive a great deal of comfort by the well-behaved pattern of
M2 and M3 at this point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just say a word about these
directives.
One can debate the particular language but we are so far
off the numbers in the directive labeled "alternative draft I," which
is the same as the one we had last time, that that seems to me to be a
kind of bare-faced evasion of responsibility.
[We should be] reac
to what has happened in a somewhat more sophisticated way than just
putting in different numbers in the existing directive, which raises
the question of what has been happening here. Mr. Keehn.
MR. KEEHN. Well, I'd also favor alternative B, largely for
I came to the meeting wondering whether we
the reasons Bob stated.
might not fiddle with the words "might" and "would;" but based on the
I would make it symmetrical on both sides.
conversation I would not.
I'd favor the second draft alternative. That seems to me a
responsible way of dealing with the aberrations that we've
experienced. I just have a slight fear that if we drop the numbers
altogether, as called for in the third alternative draft, it might be
a bit [unintelligible] for doing anything like that.
We might save
So, I'd be in favor of "B" with the
that for the July meeting.
wording proposed in the second alternative.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I came to the meeting with a
couple of questions in mind and one was, though I agree with the staff
forecast: Do I really believe it's going to happen?
I also had a
question about whether I should continue to believe in the lags that
everyone keeps telling me are going to catch up with us one of these
But I guess I come out feeling, for all of the reasons that
days.
were discussed before, that I probably should believe the forecast.
Given that belief, I do think we are going to get the kind of growth
that we are looking for. And that leads to another question which is:
If we do in fact achieve that kind of growth, should we attempt to
push the economy a little further to stimulate it more?
I think that
there are some dangers in doing that; I think that would tend to push
us beyond the long-term trend of the economy.
To me the risk at the
moment is an overstimulation and the reigniting of inflation and
inflationary expectatio
As has been noted, we already have some
dangerous inflation in the service sector of the economy.
So, having gone through that analysis I come out, as you
would expect I suppose, for alternative B--not to change policy at the
moment.
I was struck, though, by the discussion around the table. We
had some remarks earlier on that we are expecting this kind of growth
but we are not really seeing it showing up in the statistics.
It
seems to me that we heard this morning that that kind of growth is
perhaps beginning to surface, at least in some parts of the country.
There was a lot of divergence, but at least in my own area--and I
heard others say this--we are beginning to get some statistical
evidence that the growth we're looking for is perhaps coming on line.
So again, Mr. Chairman, I would choose alternative B with a 5 to 9
percent associated federal funds rate.
And I suppose that would

5/20/86

suggest to me a borrowing level of about $300 million.
I too would
like to have a directive that would take account of what has been
happening to the monetary aggregates: I think not to acknowledge that
overshoot would not be responsible.
I had originally thought that the
basic drafting of alternative I would be acceptable with the inclusion
of the language about the monetary aggregates shown in alternative II.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I share the optimism
about growth over the second half of the year and, as a result, the
lack of good evidence at the moment creates an uncertainty that
suggests to me that alternative B is the appropriate prescription for
policy in the period ahead simply because we don't know what is
happening and that alternative pretty much holds the current position.
As to the directive itself, I would favor draft alternative II for the
reason that there is a recognition of the rapid growth in the
aggregates that has already taken place and that we would expect
through the second quarter. And it places M2 and M3 first, with
simply a recognition following that of the M1 growth. Lastly, it does
suggest or maintain the idea that some firming could take place in the
future given that rapid growth, if the economy begins to perform as we
would anticipate and the pressures begin to show up in prices. All
those things to me seem to be consistent with (1) what we think and
hope the outlook will be, and (2) a realization that M1, M2, and M3
are outside [their ranges] and that the numbers are somewhat different
than last month, but nonetheless we maintain them as guideposts.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They're somewhat different all right!
That's an understatement of the situation.
MR. GUFFEY. Well, draft directive III has no numbers in it
I think that's a rather
at all with respect to any of the aggregates.
marked departure from what we've done in the past and one that I would
not feel comfortable with.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, as you indicated in the beginning-and I think you pretty well said it all--the economy is being pulled
in a lot of different directions. And it seems to me that this is a
time when perhaps we should stay about where we are. Looking at the
economic factors, there doesn't seem to be any reason for easing if
we're half-way right in our assessment of what the economy is doing.
And Ml, as we know, has been going through the ceiling and now the
broader aggregates seem to be picking up a good deal.
We have these
special problems with particular sectors like agriculture and other
manufacturing, but as you pointed out those are not things that we can
address very well with monetary policy.
If we tried to nudge the
dollar down, for example, it might well backfire on us and we'd really
achieve no improvement in our balance of payments.
So, I've come down
to the point that I think we ought to stay about where we are.
I
would go with "B," although in the absence of a sharp deceleration in
economic activity I'd be real happy if the aggregates came in at "C"
or even below that.
But if we get a clear signal that activity is
beginning to accelerate beyond what any of us seem to expect and if
the aggregates also are strengthening more than we anticipate, then I
think we're going to have to be prepared at some early point to think

-28-

5/20/86

in terms of moving in the direction, anyway, of restraint.
I would
not say restraint, but in that direction.
I think alternative III-and this probably will surprise most of you, knowing my past views-really captures the posture.
I think we ought to take it at this
point; I hasten to add, however, that I would want to reinsert the
short-term numerical targets for the aggregates when we get around to
addressing the longer-term aggregates at our July meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I'd be in favor of maintaining the existing
degree of restraint right now but I definitely would have a bias in
the direction of a somewhat firmer policy.
In other words, at this
point in time, I think it's more likely that we will have to firm than
ease, as you said earlier. What concerns me is that there is always
the possibility that when we see the "whites of their eyes" it will be
too late.
I am not sure that this is the time to begin to get some
[unintelligible] back in, but we may be getting close to that time.
And I would be particularly concerned if we did see some pickup in
economic activity and that didn't flow through to a firming in the
dollar; I think Sam said before that the trend in general still seems
to be downward.
That would concern me--if there really came a time
when almost no matter what we did we couldn't easily turn that tide.
In any case, I would be in favor of the existing degree of reserve
restraint, but would favor language that would indicate something
other than symmetry--language that would indicate possibly moving
toward a firmer policy down the road.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. First of all, I gathered from trying to piece
together a few comments in the Bluebook and the Greenbook that the
staff views at least the upper end of the M1 target as being
consistent with the GNP forecast and that that can be achieved at
roughly today's interest rates.
So that implies a significant slowing
in M1 over the balance of the year without any action on our part.
If
all of that is right then I, too, favor alternative B. As far as I
can judge, it will take us about where we want to go.
I do think, as
others have commented, that the directive language perhaps matters a
great deal this time around. I have a strong preference for the third
alternative principally because, at least in my mind, that is the
clearest statement of what we intend to do if growth in the aggregates
doesn't slow as expected; and I think it's probably important to make
that point.
I also think that we can insert a sentence in there with
some numbers if that's desirable; certainly that's doable.
I am a
little concerned about the language in there having to do with lesser
reserve restraint because it points to things like slowing money
growth or the foreign exchange markets whereas I think that slowing
money growth and a stronger dollar might at least in the short run be
more than welcome.
I am not sure that I would want to respond to
that.
Beyond that, it also refers to sluggish economic performance
and I think we have largely conceded that growth in the second quarter
at least is going to turn out to look kind of sluggish--real growth of
2 percent, given the adjustment that is still going on in the energy
sector and so forth. So I would be a little concerned about that kind
of language--that such developments might prompt a policy response,
and I don't find that appropriate at this juncture.

-29-

5/20/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

I think alternative B is the right policy course
MR. BOEHNE.
given the mix of hopes and anxieties and uncertainties that we face.
As to what we do about an M1 that has blown out of its targets: I
think we do have to acknowledge it,

and I think something along the

To go all
lines of variant II for the operational paragraph is right.
the way to variant III I think is premature. We will be having a
meeting

in July in which we will have to reevaluate the aggregates for

the second half of the year. It may be prudent at that time--or it
may not be--to change the target ranges. It may also be appropriate
to acknowledge a different weighting; but it seems to me that a midquarter meeting is not the appropriate time to do that. So, I would
acknowledge that [monetary growth] is over the target and then have a
more fundamental look at the normal point in the calendar in July.
There is also the advantage in July that [your Congressional]
testimony would be following our decision fairly promptly and whatever
we do can be wrapped around the appropriate words.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Governor Angell.

Mr. Morris.

Mr. Morris has stepped out.

MR. ANGELL. I also favor alternative B and I prefer draft
I would want to be a little clearer on the fourth line of draft
II.
II to say rapid M1 growth and weakness in M1 velocity. I am not sure
that M2 is rapid when it's right in the middle of our range and
expected to be in the middle of the range. I do believe, however,
that there is another immediate policy move that needs to be made to
reflect the weakness of the dollar and the undesirability of further
I would think it would be just
weakening of the dollar at this point.
ideal if the Chairman could negotiate with the Secretary of the
Treasury so he would be willing to have intervention on behalf of the
dollar, provided the Japanese and Germans cut their discount rates 1/2
point. So, I would like to see something take place in this
environment; and I think that would be a step that would be helpful to
everyone.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we discuss the attitude toward
intervention a little after we get finished with this instead of
mixing it up. If you want to discuss it, I think it may be a good
idea. We will reach this decision and then discuss that. Mr. Morris.
MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I also support alternative B but
for different reasons, it seems. The stronger growth projected in the
second half is really entirely a function of the improvement in the
trade balance, and our ability to forecast the timing and magnitude of
changes in the trade balance is not so great that we can have
confidence that we can forecast it extremely well this time. If we
don't get a third-quarter improvment in the trade balance, I think we
will continue to have a pretty sluggish forecast. I don't see
anything else that is going to pull the economy [up] very rapidly.
So, I don't think we can move on the anticipation that the third
quarter is in the bag yet. As a lot of people have said, we have to
see the whites of the eyes of this narrowing trade deficit.
I question whether we are in fact putting excessive liquidity
into the system now. I proposed, when we were last talking about the
long-range targets, that we set targets for M3 and total liquid

5/20/86

assets; I assumed a minus 1 percent velocity for 1986.
As I look at
the fourth-quarter [and] the first-quarter rates of growth that would
be compatible with a growth of 6 to 6-1/2 percent for nominal GNP I
don't see that; the only thing in the picture that would lead one to
think that we are building excessive liquidity is M1.
I am not very
sure that we understand the meaning of that growth of M1 for future
economic growth.
On the inflation front, I am more optimistic I think than
many around the table, but I have been looking at what I call the
"core" inflation rate and that is the price indexes eliminating food
and energy.
If you do that, you see that there hasn't been any
deceleration in the inflation rate in 1985; and if you look at the
projected inflation rate for 1987, it doesn't look at all bad because
it is not much different than the core inflation rate now. It just
depends on what set of numbers you have gotten used to looking at.
I
think quite clearly the recent sets of numbers for the CPI and the
wholesale price index had a lot of one-shot effects from food and
energy that are not going to be repeated; we have to understand that
this is an aberration. And when the inflation rate gets back to the
core rate, we shouldn't be too much alarmed because that was the
fundamental situation all along.
With respect to the directive, I appear to be the only one
favoring draft directive I. The reason is that it seems very clear to
me that when we meet in July, we're going to look at the growth rate
of M1 and either we will have to eliminate M1 as a target or rebase it
again.
I think that is clearly in the cards.
And if that is the
case, I don't see any reason to equivocate in letting the market know
what they already know: that we are discounting M1 in monetary policy.
I don't think we kid anybody if we think the market feels otherwise.
I don't think we can tell the market a different story with a
[different] form of the directive than the former directive because I
don't think we really mean it.
Are we really going to tighten up
money and tighten up interest rates in a sluggish economy in order to
get the M1 growth rate down?
If we are not, then it seems to me it's
time to recognize that fact; and it seems to me directive I is an
ideal way of beginning to do that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You leave me totally confused, if I may
say so.
I would think the thrust of your comments would lead you to
want to change directive I.
MR. MORRIS.
Well, directive I is where we talk about the
expected rates of growth of M2 and M3 and it has language, which comes
in after that, to the effect that the growth of Ml is uncertain. That
suggests to me a downgrading of the significance of M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. People can read the same thing
differently, but I think the interpretation of keeping alternative I
would be that nothing has changed in relative emphasis because we
haven't changed the language.
If we want to change the relative
emphasis we would change the wording of the directive. The [draft]
wording may not be perfect, but--

also.

MR. MORRIS. Well, I would be happy to make that suggestion
If you accept the proposition that we are going to have to do

5/20/86

something in July, it seems to me to make sense to start doing
something now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to argue the point in
substance.
All I am saying is that if you want to make a change, I
would think that the last thing you would want is the old directive
repeated again, which says we are not changing anything.
MR. MORRIS.
Perhaps I inferred that drafts II and III imply
that we are going to give a lot more emphasis to Ml.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't think they're implying that.

MR. MORRIS.
Well, maybe these things are getting so obscure,
Mr. Chairman, that we ought to decide what they mean.
MR. ANGELL.

I think that's pretty close to the truth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Well, I would support maintaining the existing
reserve pressure but I have the same problem with the alternatives
presented today as I did a few months ago, and that is that there
seems to be so little difference among them. I would like Bob Parry
to give me the model that shows the impact in 1987 of a difference in
M1 growth in this quarter of 3/4 percentage point at annual rate
between "A" and "B" and another 3/4 percentage point between "B" and
"C," and 1/2 percentage point between the alternatives for M2, and 1/4
point between those for M3.
I would like you to tell me how those
marginal changes will impact on inflation, trade, auto sales, housing,
etc. in 1987.
I think these are very, very, tiny differences. As I
say, I'm totally willing to go with maintaining the existing reserve
pressure; but "A" doesn't send a message to me that it is a big change
in the easing direction, nor does "C" seem like a big change the other
way, particularly when we are talking about [a quarter point on these]
numbers.
Maybe I am missing something or maybe you are hiding those
equations from me, but I haven't seen that kind of forecasting ability
around here. Anyhow, in terms of the problems in the economy, as I
said, I doubt that "A," "B," or "C" will solve our trade problems
immediately or take care of manufacturing or third world debt or all
of the other ailments we talk about.
So, for that reason I will stick
with the status quo.
On the directives, again because we are going to
take a fresh look at this in July, I would just go with alternative
II.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. I also would agree that alternative B is the
right approach. However, I generally agree with what Frank was saying
on the directive.
I don't know exactly what the right language is,
but I would prefer to be as neutral as possible on the directive.
I
certainly wouldn't want to acknowledge the growth of M1 at this point
because right now we are still trying to determine whether that growth
is a response to the decline in interest rates and whether the demand
for money might lead us actually to want to increase bank reserves,
rather than cut back on the growth of Ml, to accommodate a further
shift in the demand for money--at least an increase in the quantity
demanded because of some [unintelligible].
I certainly wouldn't want

5/20/86

-32-

to send out the red flag about the fact that we're concerned it is
growing too fast when we don't even know yet whether this is a
portfolio shift or whether what's going on is a result of declining
interest rates and inflationary expectations or whether it is
something to be concerned about.
There are only six weeks before the
next meeting, and I'd say we certainly don't have to get stewed up
about the aggregates when we can address this whole issue very
carefully in July. We can decide then what we are going to do about
the targets when we have a better chance to judge whether anything is
happening to the economy as a result. Right now all around the table
we have said very clearly that nobody sees any strong evidence that
anything is going on. We're still in this 2 percent pattern. We are
all hopeful with regard to the forecast, I agree; I too am optimistic
about the second half of the year. But until we get a little evidence
at least in the orders data--or something to indicate that there's a
pickup--I would like to remain absolutely neutral in the directive
about where we want to go.
I wouldn't want to send out any signal
whatsoever to the market at this point.
I would wait six weeks and
see what we want to do then. That's when we ought to have a little
more time to decide whether the second half of the year is going to be
the kind of situation we are hoping for.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, I also would agree on
alternative B for all of the reasons that were given. On the
directive, I agree with Frank and Manuel's point of staying neutral;
it seems to me that alternative III does that much more than
alternative I, as was discussed earlier.
It does not use numbers;
it's very straightforward.
In fact, it says we don't know. We do
have July coming up and that's a traditional point at which we take a
new look at this.
This [directive] would not become public until
after the July meeting, which I assume would be pretty close to the
time that you would be testifying. You would have the opportunity to
explain it all.
It seems to me this signal of not putting any numbers
in right now, as in draft directive III, is the best indication of
consistency, [acknowledging] that we are a bit confused. And it seems
to me it gives you the opportunity to say whatever needs to be said
come July.
I would very strongly go with option III.
MR. JOHNSON. My only concern about that was that it implied
that we might have lesser reserve restraint if there was a marked
slowing in money growth.
I would say that we're so uncertain about
the money demand situation that I wouldn't want to imply that we would
ease if money growth slowed--even substantially. If we take out any
response to the aggregates, I would be happy with that.
MR. PARRY. Are you saying that if money does not slow at all
over the next six weeks and we have continued [high] growth rates,
that you would not be of a mind to make a move?
MR. JOHNSON. That would depend on whether we are seeing
something happen in the economy by then.
MR. PARRY. I think that's really where the difference is.
think there are some people who say they would.
I think that's a
difference of substance.

I

-33-

5/20/86

MR. JOHNSON. Well, everybody will have a different opinion.
I would want to see if the
I am just saying that's my opinion.
economy was catching on as a result of this M1 growth that we have
had.
The base is not really doing anything. There has been big
growth in M1 and I would like to see if that is catching on or if
people are just deciding to save out of those other checkable deposits
In July, [unintelligible] if things were really
or what is happening.
starting to catch fire--if orders data and leading indicators were
looking a lot stronger--I would say that would be a good indication
that money was being used more for transactions than we had thought at
this point.
MR. MELZER. You weren't doing this, but I think it's
dangerous to draw a parallel between now and year ago when we had
similar problems. The reason I say that is that interest rates are
down a heck of a lot more than they were a year ago, the dollar is
down, and oil prices are down. In a sense it's easy to slip into the
mode, in general, of thinking that this is exactly where we were a
I am not sure we are because of those other forces that are
year ago.
at work and what we may see down the road in terms of a possible
resumption in inflation. In my mind, it may not be as easy this time
around as it was a year ago, just from a market perspective point of
view, to abandon the targets.
But I guess that's for July.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we ought to stay in a
holding pattern and that means I favor alternative B, like everybody
I also favor being
On the directive, I favor alternative II.
else.
neutral. And I see no conflict in being neutral with allowing the
market to know that we acknowledge what's happening with the
aggregates without making a judgment; we just let the market know that
I think not to do that would risk giving the wrong
we know this.
While I think we now are
So, I would prefer alternative II.
signals.
probably closer to the time when we may feel some need to snug up a
bit, I would be careful not to give any indication to the market that
I felt that way, because it just might make it happen; it might give
rise to something.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Like Mr. Parry, I am not so sanguine
about M2 and M3; and I guess the greatest concern that I have is
really even more with M3, where for Bob it was M2.
The concern that I
have about M3 relates to this question that Frank raised about liquid
assets or whatever you call it.
We have a situation right now where
there has been a tremendous burst in longer-term financing; but we
also have a situation in which there has been a tremendous burst in
both intermediate- and short-term financing as well as the long-term,
through which the banks' role in that process is one of a contingent
source of liquidity through standbys and guarantees and
[unintelligible] and all of these other things.
So, one of the
reasons M3 looks so sanguine and indeed why liquid assets, or whatever
that is called, look so sanguine is because the nature of the
relationship of the banking system to this process is different. What
is there now is a very substantial and very rapidly growing contingent
liquidity [unintelligible] on the banking system. And I think that is
something that bears on the way in which some of these broader

5/20/86

measures of liquidity and financial expansion look. So, I put that on
top of Bob Parry's earlier argument.
I for one am not so sanguine
about what M2 and M3 are telling us, and I am of the view that when we
take account of conventional liquidity plus what I would loosely call
contingent liquidity that we have kind of a paradox in that the
contingent liquidity--what [financing] could have to be produced-doesn't show up in a lot of the conventional measures we are used to.
Another quick point: Though none of us may be very impressed
with Ml, and I am not either, I think it's worth noting that for the
first time in months and months and months, people in the market are
looking at Ml both in the United States and abroad. Nobody is getting
alarmed or anything like that, but there is a change in that people
are looking at it again. They are not reacting to it but they are
looking at it, and I don't think we should kid ourselves about that
either.
As far as policy is concerned, I would certainly very much
put myself in the "B" camp.
I also have a little bias in the
direction of the need to be more sensitive to the possibility of "B"
with a bit of a bias toward greater restraint, or "C."
I don't know
what is going to happen between now and the next meeting either, but I
certainly could envision a set of circumstances in which even in that
intermeeting period we might feel the need to snug a bit.
Because I
feel that way, I favor directive III.
I think directive III, with a
couple of modest word changes, can be made compatible with the point
that Governor Johnson made, which I think has some validity, by making
the first conditional sentence something like: "If such a slowing does
not develop, somewhat greater reserve restraint would, or might, be
acceptable in the context of a pickup in economic growth" and putting
a reference to the monetary aggregates in there. But the part that is
more important to me is the somewhat lesser reserve restraint
sentence.
The only thing that would move me in the direction of
somewhat lesser restraint that I really can think of right now would
be if the balance of the quarter materialized in a way in which the
economy itself were distinctly sluggish. So, I would either want to
get rid of the lesser restraint sentence altogether or just have that
sentence limited simply to a distinctly more sluggish economy rather
than all of this other stuff.
MR. JOHNSON. That was exactly the point I was trying to
make.
If the economy were showing a lot of strength--even if M1
dropped off quite a bit and it indicated that the velocity really
would rebound sharply--we wouldn't want to ease under those
conditions.
I agree with that, but the opposite applies too.
The
economy could be growing strongly but if velocity were showing
continued weakness, we wouldn't necessarily want to tighten.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN.
I favor alternative B and the number II statement
of the directive, although I could take number III with both the
suggestions that Jerry has made with regard to saying something about
the aggregates.
That is why I mildly favor II: because I don't want
to indicate at this point that we are turning our back on the
aggregates or that we are not being watchful of them. I also agree
about the change in the sentence on somewhat lesser restraint, because

5/20/86

I do think the one thing that could happen that might make me want
somewhat lesser restraint would be a remarkably sluggish economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Wallich, you can interrupt all
this unanimity for Alternative B.
MR. WALLICH. Well, I don't have much [to say] for the "B"
notion because of the problems about the situation. People are unsure
about [unintelligible], and that is particularly the situation--when
one feels unsure about the sensitivity of what one is doing--where it
I know this could have
is better in that moment simply to go to "C."
a bad effect, but initially it will reduce some of the errors that one
might make if one began with "B."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. WALLICH.

You want to tighten up a little?

Yes, and I have had a hard time coming to this.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, with that exception, the easy part
I have
The difficult part is what that means.
is alternative B.
heard considerable expression that the wording of the directive ought
to be changed, with only one exception. We have to look at these
Just to speak for myself, I
carefully to see what the difference is.
am not sure I am alarmed--if that would be a fair way to express it-over Ml.
Three consecutive months of high numbers do give me a little
pause, however much I deemphasize M1.
Even if I don't pay any
attention to it at all, this is a time for a little perking up of the
ears anyhow, particularly with some rumblings [unintelligible] in M2
I also have to agree
and M3, although not at a serious level as yet.
that it's very hard to see what would make us ease during this period
except reasonably clear signs of softness in business activity. To
see M1 falling below the particular M1 number would not impel a great
easing at this point with nothing going on in the economy. However-MR. RICE.

Who needs much more than 20 percent growth?

MR. JOHNSON.
think we could.

I bet we could.

I wouldn't want to, but I

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'll see what the salient differences are
in these directives here. The first sentence is going to be the same
anyway--"maintain."
I wonder, Mr. Chairman, if I might make a
MR. BOEHNE.
It
suggestion as to something that might make most people happy?
seems to me that most people want some acknowledgement that Ml is
overshooting but people--at least the majority--also want to be
totally neutral about what we might do, in order to not tip the scales
one way or the other before the July meeting. One way to achieve that
would be in-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOHNE.
what I suggest.

I don't accept that as a premise.

All right.

Well then, there is no use having

-36-

5/20/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The Committee may decide that, but I
didn't think there was necessarily all that much unanimity that under
no conditions would we change-MR. BOEHNE. Not under no conditions.
What I meant was that
at this point we just don't bias the directive one way or the other.
If we acknowledge
I do agree with that point.
MR. JOHNSON.
the overshooting of M1 growth, which may be appropriate, I think we at
least ought to balance our acknowledgement of the growth of M1 with
the two possible meanings associated with that growth. One is that we
have a big bulge in money demand for various reasons associated with
lower interest rates, declining oil prices, and all those things.
But
it also can mean the opposite; it could be a warning of too much
liquidity. We don't know right now, it seems to me, which one of
those meanings to apply to it.
MR. BOEHNE. Well, I think Governor Johnson is right. One
way to deal with that is just to drop the sentence at the bottom of
page 12 in draft alternative II that says, "This action is expected to
be consistent with a deceleration in money growth over the balance of
If we just take that sentence out and then in the next
the quarter."
sentence drop "however," it simply acknowledges that we have had rapid
growth. Then we could follow the numerical specifications by saying
"somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable"
etc.
It seems to me that that says: Look, we have overshot M1 and we
are not sure what it means; we may respond one way or the other, but
We will wait
we are not at this point saying which way we might go.
until developments unfold.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that's what we wanted to say, that's
the way to say it.
But I think a lot of people would not say that.
MR. PARRY. I think I wouldn't want to say that. What I
would want to say is that if money continues to grow, I have a
concern.
I think you're saying that if money continues to grow you
don't have this concern until you see some other things occurring. I
am not so sure that I could support that.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, we were just making an offering.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There are a zillion contingencies as
usual, but just on this point, I guess there is a question: If
monetary growth continued at the recent rates--I'm talking about all
of the aggregates now--with Ml averaging about 15 percent if we use
recent months, and M2 projected now for the second quarter at 9-1/2
percent and M3 at 8-1/4 percent, are we highly neutral about those
growth rates or not?
We had 13 or 14 percent growth in M2 in April
and 11 percent in M3.
Are we really saying that if growth continued
at that rate of speed, just looking at the monetary aggregates alone,
that we're neutral?
MR. PARRY.

Well, it depends on what happens to the economy.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

All other things equal at this point.

MR. PARRY. But even there I have a problem because these are
not contemporaneous events.
If one is expecting the real developments

5/20/86

-37-

to follow what has happened with regard to the aggregates to some
extent, then if we are waiting for that kind of confirmation and it
occurs, we may have to do a lot more later than we would like to do.
MR. JOHNSON. Bob, I agree with what you are saying, but I am
just asking: How long have we been sitting around here waiting for the
lags now?
We have been watching.
MR. PARRY.
MR. JOHNSON.

It's obviously closer.
I don't know whether we are closer or not.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how close we are, but I do
know that these rates of growth of the aggregates have picked up
substantially from what they had been.
Isn't there some point in time that the Ml
MR. ANGELL.
Particularly if
growth path in and of itself gets to be fast enough?
we are moving down the demand curve due to the interest rate declines,
I would expect that at some point in time--that is, if interest rates
don't drop--we ought not to be getting that kicker any more, so we
would expect M1 to decelerate. It seems to me that it's more logical
I guess I
The question is: How much?
that M1 is going to decelerate.
would like to have Jim's comments on that. How long after we bring
interest rates down do we expect to get the quantity demand response
just due to the lower interest rate?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think Don has the econometric results
that we used. There is a lot of uncertainty, but we have various
models.
You are looking at the numbers, Don.
MR. KOHN. According to the models, for what it's worth, the
interest rate effects would be expected to begin tapering off to a
certain extent in May but mostly in June and then even more going out.
We are not sure that the models have captured the interest rate
effects all that well, given that we're at levels of opportunity costs
that we have just never experienced before with respect to NOW
accounts. But certainly the pattern ought to be one of tapering off,
and that's what we built into the paths.
Let's say you estimate that 5-1/2 percent of the
MR. ANGELL.
M1's recent path might be explainable simply by the interest rate
That response is going to disappear at some point in time.
response.
MR. PARRY. Governor Angell, I think we all agree that if
money begins to grow more slowly, we would have some degree of comfort
I think the first issue, and one where we seem to have some
in that.
What does that imply in terms of
disagreement, is what if it doesn't?
what we say and do?
I want you to understand that if Ml begins to
MR. ANGELL.
grow slowly, [unintelligible] if we get it down to the 5 percent path
after we have been at 15 percent and we don't see any evidence. We
can do all the talking that we want to about the economy's growth
path, but the hard evidence is that the economy is still on a 2
If
percent real growth path. That's all the hard evidence we have.
we don't have any evidence and we get into the third quarter and the

5/20/86

third quarter still looks like 2 percent or drifting to 1-1/2 percent
or slower growth, we've got to ease.
MR. PARRY.
MR. JOHNSON.

Of course.
Unless the inflationary picture--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible] to hear you say that.
I
don't know what the growth path is, but frankly I'm not sure there is
all that much difference between II and III.
The first point we may
consider is: Do we expect whatever action we take here, which is not
much change at the moment, to be consistent with a deceleration of
money growth?
That's what we are told, as a simple forecast; and I
guess we would like to see it happen.
If that doesn't happen, we
might tighten, depending upon the strength of business. That's the
most important thing. I think that's what people are saying; but it
is dependent upon the strength of business.
MR. JOHNSON. The nub of the problem is that everybody starts
guessing what growth rate that means. What's the third-quarter number
that will make us do that?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
number which nobody knows.
MR. JOHNSON.

I wouldn't rely upon a third-quarter

Well, I agree.

That's what

I am saying.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We'd need a variety of hard evidence--say,
some pickup in orders, continued strength in housing, and automobile
sales continuing strong. With regard to the projections of next
quarter's GNP there's a certain amount of skepticism, although these
current indicators tend to get reflected in those projections.
I am
not talking about fine tuning the language.
It needs to be fine
tuned, but I would have thought that you captured the essence of what
people were saying. Yes, we do expect a deceleration [in monetary
growth]; if that doesn't develop, we are going to be a bit worried but
we are not going to be worried enough to change things unless the
deceleration is accompanied by some feeling that the economy is [not]
doing reasonably well. And the only thing that would make us ease, as
near as we can see now, is a clear sign that the economy is not doing
well relative to current expectations.
If that is the essence of what
we are saying we ought to be at both II and III have the [prima facie
evidence] of that, or more than the [unintelligible].
MR. GUFFEY.
It seems to me that there is only one issue, Mr.
Chairman, and that is whether or not we want to maintain some range
for the aggregates, particularly as set out in alternative II--keeping
M2 and M3 as the first targets and indicating that M1 is sort of
uncertain.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that could be incorporated in III.
The difference in the wording as it starts out is not much in
substance, as near as I can see.
MR. PARRY. To me the phrase "if such a slowing does not
develop" was the one that made the difference.

-39-

5/20/86

The one big difference is that I read III to
MR. MORRIS.
mean that we are reemphasizing Ml, because in last month's directive
we emphasized M2 and M3 and then we noted that M1 was uncertain.
I don't think it was meant to reemphasize
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Ml; it's a recognition that M1 is the one that is growing at a jet
propulsion rate of speed.
MR. GUFFEY.

I read III as Frank does--that M1 is in some way

elevated.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have two different things: what's the
inherent rate of Ml, which I don't think anybody is intending to
change here, and what is way out of line with respect to what was
expected, which clearly M1 has been. It's like price and income
It's a low-weighted aggregate way the heck out of line.
effects.
It seems to me that we could make some progress
MR. ANGELL.
if we decide which draft we want to alter. Draft II has the
aggregates mentioned and I slightly prefer to have the aggregates
If we start from draft II, then let's make the changes.
mentioned.
If everybody wants to start from draft III, okay, but I don't think we
can work from both of them at the same time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think you're probably right.
Let's start with one or the other; I don't think that there is that
I can alter in either direction.
much difference.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can put in anything we want with
the numbers. What matters to me is the kind of contingent operational
approach between now and the next meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

Do you want to start on II?

Yes.

MR. JOHNSON. I am not really picky anymore.
worried if this were to be released immediately.

I would be

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The first sentence is "maintain. Then
"This action is expected to be consistent with a deceleration in money
That's a statement of fact.
growth over the balance of the quarter."
We could say "In
The next sentence is a simple statement of fact too.
view of the rapid money growth thus far in the quarter and apparent
weakness in velocity, the Committee anticipates faster growth in the
monetary aggregates [than expected at the last meeting], particularly
for Ml."
MR. ANGELL.

That would be fine.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
for M2 and M3?

Now, what numbers are we putting in there

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
and 8 percent.

Alternative B would say 10 percent

MR. KOHN. Well, alternative B says 10 percent and 8-1/2
percent for M2 and M3.

-40-

5/20/86

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

be 9 to

MR. ANGELL.
11 percent.

8 to

10 percent.

Alternative B says

10 percent;

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
M2 and M3 are
rates in a range of 8 to 10 percent.
MR. ANGELL.

That's

it would have to

expected to

expand at

all right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
There is a slight peculiarity in that it
says M2 and M3, and as it works out M3 is expected to be 8 percent and
the 10 percent is for M2.
If we put in 8 to 10 percent, it sounds
just the opposite according to this.
MR. BLACK.

10 to 8 percent!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
to expand.

The broader aggregates are expected

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Would we say M3 and M2?
This says
"respectively;" you didn't mean that.
We want to take out the word
"respectively."
M1 growth at an annual rate of-MR. ANGELL.

12 to

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARRY.

14 percent.
Are

That is one

[unintelligible]?
of the nice things

about alternative

III.
MR. RICE.

Are you changing your mind?

MR. PARRY.

Have we

I never was

off it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Growth at the fantastic annual rate of--.
ever had a quarterly growth rate that big?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

MR. MELZER.

Nothing ever got written down this way.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

What did you say?

You had that happen in 1980.

MR. MORRIS.
Why don't we say "The behavior of M1
to be subject to unusual uncertainty."
MR. ANGELL.

"Unusually rapid growth."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

continues

This illustrates the problem of--

It grew about
No,

12 percent;

13 percent all year last year.
it was

Okay, 12 percent.

11.9 percent.

-41-

5/20/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

12 to 14 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[unintelligible].
MR. ANGELL.

What is it?

12 to 14 percent appears big

There is no use denying it;

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
sentences.

it's there.

Well, the real problem is the next two

MR. MELZER. With those kind of numbers there, I don't see
how we can give it symmetrical treatment.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
it as symmetrical.

Even with those numbers, I don't see

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me just suggest that we pick up
the two sentences with some modifications from the other directive,
and say "If the anticipated slowing in coming weeks does not develop,
somewhat greater reserve restraint would or might be acceptable in the
context of a pickup in the growth of the economy, taking account"-keep the rest of that.
Then "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might
or would be acceptable..."
Why do
MR. MORRIS.
Why don't we just eliminate that, Paul?
we need to talk about less reserve restraint?
I don't think that is
one of the options we are considering now, is it?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that is all right with me if it is
I don't know; some people may want to put it in
acceptable to others.
there.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'd only want it in if it is limited
to more sluggish economic [activity] or something like that.
I would
prefer it out, but if it were limited to "lesser reserve restraint
might be acceptable in the face of a distinct slowing in the economy,"
then I could live with it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's work on the second sentence.
"Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable should there
be"--do you want to leave in the marked slowing of money growth?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
wouldn't hurt my feelings.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. RICE.

Money growth could be zero and it

Would be acceptable?

I am not sure of that.
Me neither.

MR ANGELL.
[Unintelligible] these aggregates
[unintelligible] one path and it changed from 15 percent.
MR. RICE. Because of the vagueness of it, you don't know
quite what it means.
How much lower?

5/20/86

MR. JOHNSON. And for how long?
two, I could stand zero, but-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
to make you want to ease?
MR. RICE.

If it were just a month or

In a six-week period, what is going

I would be prepared to drop it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. "Somewhat lesser reserve restraint might
be acceptable in the context of a marked slowing in money growth and
pronounced sluggishness of economic performance."
MR. ANGELL.
That is right.
That will be fine.
I don't see
what is wrong with the way that is stated. It says about the same
thing. Slower monetary growth than unexpected, especially of the
broader aggregates, and sluggish economic performance.
MR. PARRY.

"Pronounced" makes the difference.

MR. MORRIS.
How about using the word "only"?
acceptable only in the context of--." ?

only."

"It would be

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we could say "it would be acceptable
Or "might" carries that.
MR. ANGELL.

"And pronounced sluggish economic performance."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

Sluggishness of economic performance.

Not "pronounced."

MR. ANGELL.

I like that better--"sluggishness."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

Now the previous sentence.

And a period after "performance," right?
Are you going to strike the rest?

"Somewhat greater reserve restraint"--do
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
you want to put "would" or "might" in there?
SEVERAL.

"Would."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
--"be acceptable in the context of a
pickup in growth of the economy."
Presumably if we did either,
particularly easing--well, I'm not talking about some very minor
thing--but if we wanted to make any pronounced move we'd have a
consultation anyway. Let's see now, reading from alternative II, "In
the implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee
seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions.
This action is expected to be consistent with a
deceleration in money growth over the balance of the quarter.
However, in view of the rapid money growth thus far in the quarter and
the apparent weakness in velocity, the Committee anticipates faster
growth for the monetary aggregates, particularly M1, than expected at
the last meeting. M2 and M3 are expected to expand over the period
from March to June at annual rates of about 8 to 10 percent.
While

5/20/86

the behavior of M1 continues to be subject to unusual uncertainty,
growth at an annual rate of 12 to 14 percent over the period is now
anticipated.
If the anticipated slowing in monetary growth"--do you
want to put in there "particularly M2 and M3"?
SEVERAL.

No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"If the anticipated slowing in monetary
growth does not develop, somewhat greater reserve restraint would be
acceptable in the context of a pickup in the growth of the economy,
taking account of conditions in domestic and international credit
Somewhat lesser
markets and developments in foreign exchange markets.
reserve restraint might be acceptable in the context of a marked
slowing in money growth and pronounced sluggishness of economic
And then we have to stick in a federal funds rate here.
performance."
There is a question of whether you want to make that 5 to 9 percent,
We haven't changed that [6 to
which is centered on the present rate.
10 percent] forever.
MR. ANGELL.

5 to 9 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. 5 to 9 percent sounds reasonable to me,
but I think we ought to put something in the policy record that states
pretty clearly that that in itself implies no change in policy,
So long as we
because the press picks that up as a change in policy.
are clear about that: that this is a purely technical change to center
I think all this implies no change, as
it around the existing rate.
we said. We aim [for borrowing of] around $300 million--recently it's
been below $300 million--as long as these monetary aggregates are so
strong. We are not going to move anything for some weeks unless
If we have a combination of continued
something very unusual happens.
strong growth in money and clear signs, whatever they are, of some
If that
pickup in the economy, we might consider snugging up a bit.
became significantly more than a $100 million [snugging], let's say,
we'd certainly have a consultation.
Is that all understood?
MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that we are just not
It seems to me as
certain at this point what is going to happen.
If the economy
likely to be in one direction as another direction.
does grow slowly--does not pick up from the 2 percent path--the bond
market is going to know as soon as we do.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Are we ready to vote?

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Guffey
President Horn
Governor Johnson
President Melzer
President Morris
Governor Rice
Governor Seger
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-44-

5/20/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Okay.
Now, we had some question about the
intervention that we might discuss for a moment.
Do you want to
discuss this operational issue of yours, Mr. Sternlight?
Somebody
mentioned to me that you'd like to have a biweekly report.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
If I may take a minute on that, Mr.
Chairman.
The domestic account management has been submitting weekly
reports to the Committee since 1922, describing the week's open market
operations and the market background against which they were
undertaken.
While not best-sellers, they have provided a useful
current review and an important historical resource when researching
past developments.
Since going to the two-week reserve maintenance
period a couple of years ago, it has occurred to us that a two-week
reporting period would also make more sense.
This would provide a
more meaningful time interval on which to report how we've gone about
meeting the Committee's reserve objectives which are set, of course,
on a two-week time frame.
Moreover, preparation of the report every
second week should permit better use of staff resources to work on
other assignments and possibly achieve staff savings.
But I don't
Committee
want to dangle any hopes on this score, Mr. Chairman.
members will continue to get daily reports on actual Desk operations
and market developments and also a brief summary report sent out
before each Committee meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
To bring you up to date on one aspect of
this dating from 1922: I don't remember just when, but when I was in
New York I once thought that it might be a good idea to drop the
weekly report altogether and just report for the intervals between
meetings.
But this is a half way [alternative].
It seems to make a
lot of sense, but I-MR. WALLICH.
reads it--not even I.

In some sense it would.

I know not everybody

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Just out of curiosity: How many members of
the Committee read it?
[Secretary's note: Quite a few hands went up.]
MR. BLACK.
SPEAKER(?).
MR. JOHNSON.

All the time or just
Most
Once

some times?

of the time.
in a while.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
This is interesting. Well, I don't
It
This seems not unreasonable.
[unintelligible] for discussion.

passes conveniently into the reserve-MR. ANGELL.

Two weeks makes sense.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It makes sense to do that.
the new schedule is accepted.

I think that

MR. JOHNSON. I might request a slightly less technical
summary--maybe even just a one-page executive summary that would just
sort

of

[unintelligible].

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is another historical aspect
of this that should be mentioned that the Chairman didn't mention.

-45-

5/20/86

There is more than one person in this room who at some point in his
What is
career had the responsibility of drafting the weekly report.
interesting about that is that after having drafted it, no one was
permitted to read it.
MR. ANGELL.

Sounds appropriate to me!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let's discuss this intervention
I don't know if you really want to be operational
question a little.
about this, but some sense of the Committee's mood, I think, would be
useful. We have these concerns about the dollar from time-to-time,
including quite recently, and the question of coordinated intervention
I think it is fair to say that
to support the dollar arises.
historically, although the Committee has not been all that gung ho by
and large, in many particular periods we have been more receptive to
intervention on either side--certainly including for several years
I
restraining the rise of the dollar--than the Treasury has been.
suppose one way of expressing this is that neither of us has chosen to
act, although we have independent powers, when the other side has not
If the other side is more reluctant than we are,
been ready to act.
The most reluctant party has a natural advantage under
we don't act.
But the question has arisen at times, just as in
those conditions.
the most recent context, as to whether there wouldn't be some
usefulness in intervening. This question has not been pressed very
hard. Governor Angell may have some opinions of his own; he had a
more detailed proposal. But the question arises as to how useful you
think this tool is and whether we should be sympathetic in the right
conditions--meaning a weak dollar in these circumstances--toward
It is probably not
perhaps providing some support for the dollar.
relevant right now in terms of our present decision, but at some time
it may inhibit us from being as easy in monetary policy as we would
otherwise like to be for fear of its effects on the dollar. We may
not quite be in that mode right today, but we could be at some other
time--even in the [near] future, if the second contingency sentence in
the directive came to bear. How do you feel about that possibility?
I
MR. JOHNSON. Can I ask you to clarify something for me?
assume we are talking only in terms of sterilized intervention, since
otherwise it would have a bearing on what we just did earlier.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I hate to discuss this in terms of
responding [unintelligible] sterilized or unsterilized intervention
because I think we've got to make those decisions separately and ex
The intervention may be unsterilized but not in the technical
post.
sense that the amount of the open market operation is governed by what
It may coincide with a period
we do in the foreign exchange market.
of easing and in some broad sense you can say it was unsterilized. We
have this kind of separable decision. The contingency that might
arise--the one that I cited--is where we might be in at least a
I
slightly easy mode and want to intervene in the opposite direction.
guess it would be more than sterilized; in that particular case, it
would be--I don't know what the term is--"antiseptically sterilized."
We would be putting money into the domestic market and taking it out
of the foreign exchange market; we would be going in the opposite
direction. Call it "sanitized" or "insulated."
SPEAKER(?).

"Ultra-sterilized"!

5/20/86

MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that we might have some doubts
about the U.S. economy, but there is a lot out there that tells us
that the Third World is [unintelligible] debt.
[Given] Japan's and
Germany's growth rates, it seems it would be very desirable to have
some further easing of monetary policy in Japan and Germany, and I
just don't think we ought to give up.
I don't think we ought to give
them what they want, which is a little help on intervention, without
getting a step from them. I am not willing to do it unless they make
the move we want them to make.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are putting it in a negotiating
context, which could arise, but I don't know whether I absolutely want
to limit the question to that context.
One of the difficulties in
world economic situations generally is that appreciation in their
currencies, in fact, tends to depress their economic growth in the
short run.
One other reason you get as much weakness there as you get
is because their currencies have appreciated so much that their
businessmen have not been as eager, at the margin anyway, to expand as
they otherwise might be.
And that tends to support an idea that goes
in your direction, in terms of some kind of trade-off, at some point.
MR. JOHNSON. The only question I have on the point that you
made is that you have to be clear what you mean. Does "some
coordinated intervention" mean we are talking about a slight
tightening of monetary policy here to support the dollar while they
lower their interest rates?
I am not sure we want to do-I am thinking
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible] forecast.
primarily of intervention to support the dollar. If we were
tightening monetary policy here, however slightly, one ordinarily
would think narrowly that that might strengthen the dollar a little in
itself and we wouldn't have to intervene. We wouldn't have any
interest in intervening on that side.
I think the more operational
case, although it is not the case right at the moment, would occur if
we were running quite an easy monetary policy or easing further, or if
monetary policy were unchanged and the dollar was declining anyway,
making them unhappy. We would be raising some questions ourselves; we
might want to intervene to support the dollar.
One could imagine
circumstances--let's say we were tightening policy [unintelligible] or
I [don't] think that
for other reasons the dollar was strengthening.
is immediately ahead, but who knows?
We might want to intervene on
the other side.
MR. PARRY. This intervention is not directed at some
You are talking about something
momentary instability in the market?
to change the direction of the currency?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I am not talking about massive operations.
If we have a massive operation, that is another kettle of fish.
Presumably we couldn't leave that alone anyway until [unintelligible].
I think of it more as a change in the kind of attitude we have toward
intervention. One particular reflection of that might be if the
situation arose the way I described; that might make it operational
but there might be other contexts too.
MR. STERN. At the margin, another tool in the kit seems to
me to be a good idea as long as it is going to be sterilized most of
the time.
I don't think we ought to expect a lot out of it, but it

5/20/86

certainly may have some signal effect, sentiment effect, or something
It strikes me as a good idea.
like that.
I have no objections as long as it is
MR. JOHNSON.
I would
consistent with the monetary policy agreed to by the FOMC.
think that we would have to cash those chips in few and far between to
It would have to be a moment that was
make it a credible change.
really creating the right psychological impression.
MR. MELZER. In a sense, to have any fundamental impact in
the long run, it would have to be unsterilized and run fundamentally
counter to the policy--in talking about the situation you described.
MR. ANGELL. The foreign exchange market may have been
somewhat dominated in recent months by market uncertainty as to
whether or not our policy leaders in the United States would prefer a
It seems to me at this point in time, [given] the time
lower dollar.
lags that we have in regard to knowing what we have accomplished, that
it is not a desirable move for us to have an appreciably lower dollar
and [we should] take away that question of uncertainty. Right now
someone thinks someone is going to try to push it lower. Just taking
that away might create a more stable climate, which would give us more
options.
MR. MELZER. You said we could take that away unilaterally.
It would have to be in the context of the agreement with the Treasury.
[unintelligible] maybe.

MR. ANGELL.

I think that's

MR. MELZER.

In which case there might be so much confusion--

[Unintelligible] could have a big fight
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
about it.
More generally, putting the question operationally, there
have been times in the past when, quite on its own, the Open Market
Committee was not very eager to intervene and--to exaggerate a bit-I don't sense
had to be dragged kicking and screaming to the table.
that such an atmosphere exists now, under the appropriate
That's just the broadest
circumstances, but I want to confirm that.
way to put it.
A more active mode in which to put it is to take one
example, one Wayne took: If we see a positive desirability of doing it
if we can get something out of the [other countries], that is one
possibility.
It is an extra
I think Gary has said it right.
MR. BOEHNE.
There may be times when we can use it in the best
tool in the kit.
interests of the United States and we ought to do it.
MR. GUFFEY.

But in very modest amounts.

I am still unclear as to what we mean by that.
MR. JOHNSON.
Does that mean that we would let the funds rate drift up through our
active intervention to strengthen the dollar?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Barring some other decision, I think we
would conduct a net of open market operations, domestic and foreign,
to meet whatever the Committee decided upon.

5/20/86

-48-

MR. ANGELL. Roger, I remind you that we don't have a great
big stock of yen. We don't have as many as I would like us to have;
I thought we should have bought more in 1984, but--.
So, we are not
going to intervene a whole bunch because we don't have that many yen
to take profits on. But it might come time to take a little profit-MR. PARRY. The purpose of this is to communicate to the
market what we think-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that clearly would be one possible
purpose; another would be the kind of thing that Wayne described.
Independent of that, if we really thought the weakness of the dollar
was constraining what we wanted to do in reserve provision, we might
want to send out signals. Whether that would be very powerful or not
we don't know. But would it be useful to send a signal that says:
"Yes, we are worried about the dollar"?
If we want to ease anyway, we
could try to give ourselves room to ease by giving a counter signal on
the dollar. It might not work.
MR. MELZER.
fundamental sense.

That is the problem I have with it in the

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, in some fundamental, theoretical,
sense we would be moving in opposite directions.
It might not work.
But, given the importance of psychology in particular instances in the
market, one can make a case for trying.
MR. MORRIS.
In this particular market context, I think
concerted intervention would have an impact--at least in my judgment,
based on watching the market--whether it's sterilized or unsterilized.
MR. ANGELL. Well, at this moment in time, if the Japanese
were to cut their discount rate 1/2 point, and the Germans cut theirs
and we didn't cut ours and we said [unintelligible] at the same time,
I don't think you'd have to worry about an impact.
I think the
markets would take note of it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, that's easy.
But in the other case,
suppose they didn't ease their policy and we were still stuck and we
wanted to ease or not tighten and the dollar was weak. Let's put it
that way: We weren't very eager to tighten or we wanted to tighten as
little as possible, and they are not doing anything, and the dollar is
a pain-MR. ANGELL. Oh, you might make the gesture.
I'm not sure;
you might change the psychology slightly for a bit, but-MR. JOHNSON. Well, we'd only get away with this once in my
opinion. And we'd have to do it in conjunction with some support
statements by all parties, it seems to me, instead of-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, that obviously would help.

But we

could-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I'm not sure about that, as a matter
of fact.
If you take it to that extreme where you've got to have
statements and all the rest of it, then it certainly only would work
once.
I think there probably are very narrow windows of opportunity

5/20/86

when Mr. Cross can sneak in and out of the markets, maybe with some
help from the Japanese or something without having to go through that
tribal rite, that can at least create a pause at a time that's right.
And we're not going to have-MR. CROSS.

I think there have been some occasions recently

when-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

The recent past.

MR. CROSS.
--the market was very sensitive to such a thing
and it could have had considerable influence.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. MELZER.
doesn't it?
MR. CROSS.

[Unintelligible]

an impact.

Okay, well-It seems to be in the realm of possibility,

Yes.

MR. ANGELL. Your insurance goes to those people who want to
take comfort in being short in the dollar.
SPEAKER(?).

You're underscoring too many risks in the

market.
MR. PARRY. What I'd like to ask Sam about is this: If you
have a situation where the French and the Germans and the Japanese did
nothing and we eased policy and we intervened, I have the feeling that
the New York traders would sell dollars.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

They might.

That could surely happen.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think you're right.
In all these
circumstances, that would probably happen. But the question still
remains: Would they sell a little less eagerly and actively if we were
giving this contrary signal?
MR. PARRY. Well, if they think that it's going to come back
to a natural rate then you're giving them even more profit because you
took the dollar up.
They'll sell and then [unintelligible] down.
Right?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Maybe, maybe not.

MR. PARRY. Traders very often have bet against intervention
because intervention hasn't been very successful.
MR. CROSS.
situations.

There are too many possibilities and too many

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible] judgment at the time as
to whether you're going to be. And it's very hard to--

-50-

5/20/86

I do agree there are rare opportunities when it

Mr. JOHNSON.
could be useful.

If you
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I agree with Sam.
think about the last six weeks or so--maybe the last two weeks in
particular--there may well have been a point or two in that time frame
of the last six or eight weeks where we might have been able to sneak
in there with the Japanese or with the Germans, or both, and get some
stuff done without having to go through-MR. GUFFEY. I have a hard time envisioning, under the
current circumstances, that we would do intervention without
coordination with the Germans and the Japanese.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, right now, the direction we're
talking about we would get coordination with them.
MR. GUFFEY.

At least you'd have the up and up.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'll give you one not very far removed
type of hypothesis--a situation that did arise a couple of weeks ago.
Suppose we were sitting right in the posture we're sitting with and,
say, we don't want to move at the moment--we want to wait for a little
Yet we have
more evidence of monetary growth or an improved economy.
a little tendency in that direction as time passes, but the dollar
gets very weak in the meantime. So it begins forcing that decision
We might say: "Well,
sooner than we otherwise would want to do it.
let's try a little intervention in here because we don't really want
to take that step toward tightening but we're getting a little
It
concerned, or more than a little concerned, about the dollar."
might work or it might not work. But I guess the question is: What do
we lose by trying to buy a little time at the very least by doing the
intervention?
MR. PARRY.

But

[unintelligible]

with the fundamentals.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except unresolved fundamentals. We
go against; we might be doing it in the future. We're not going to
get into fundamentals.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And that is more or less where we are now.
The dollar is weak at the moment. We're slightly biased in what we
see for the future but we're not very eager to have to respond by
In
general monetary policy to a pronounced weakness in the dollar.
that particular situation, apart from this negotiating Wayne
suggested, is that the

right time to be quite willing or--depending

upon the situation--even eager to intervene?
MR. JOHNSON. Another--it may not [unintelligible]--prime
opportunity later would be this: If it does so happen that the
aggregates are growing strongly and the economy is picking up quite
substantially and we literally do decide in July or whenever that in
fact we need to tap the brakes a bit, it would be a great opportunity
to use that decision to buy dollars and--even though we're going to do
it anyway--if Germany and Japan still are dragging their feet on
stimulating their economies and it's clear that we are alone, we could

5/20/86

offer to support the dollar and see if that might lead to a better
situation with the Germans and Japanese.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given all the permutations and
combinations, I think I got about as much guidance as I could get in
the absence of specifics.
MR. FORRESTAL. Does the question arise because there has
been a shift in the Treasury's sentiment about intervention?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
hasn't been any shift.
MR. JOHNSON.

I think the question arises because there

They too--

MR. ANGELL. Well, of course, I have some concern here that
intervention ultimately is a monetary policy decision. I'm very
I don't like to lose
sympathetic with Bob Parry in regard to that.
anything. Whenever you start off and do something you prove you're
going to lose, I don't think that helps you. Personally, I would tend
to prefer not to intervene on a sterilized basis unless I were willing
to make a monetary policy adjustment relative to the two other
It just seems to me that the Secretary of the Treasury has
countries.
been the person carrying the ball here on this topic. And it's
somewhat of a monetary policy topic, so I think maybe it's appropriate
for the Federal Reserve to have the Chairman speaking on some of these
I'm somewhat encouraging him in that
issues from time-to-time.
direction.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't think that this conversation is
I'm not sure how we would come out on a
inconsistent with that.
specific [proposal], but I think we've probably gone as far as we can
If there's nothing else, we
go in the absence of something specific.
have a meeting in July. We may have a consultation before that if
something happens.
We can go eat lunch.
END OF MEETING

