Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
September 23, 1986

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, September 23, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mrs
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Volcker, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Guffey
Heller
Horn
Johnson
Melzer
Morris
Rice
Seger
Wallich

Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Bradfield, General Counsel
Oltman, Deputy General Counsel
Kichline, Economist
Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Kohn, Lindsey, Ms. Munnell,
Messrs. Prell and Siegman, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

9/23/86

-2Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director for
Monetary and Financial Policy, Board of Governors
Mr. Simpson, Deputy Associate Director, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Mr. Fousek, Executive Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York
Messrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scadding,
Scheld, Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond,
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas, San Francisco,
Chicago, New York, and Atlanta, respectively
Mr. Skaperdas, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
of Cleveland

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
September 23, 1986
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
a motion to approve?
MS. SEGER.

We need to approve the minutes.

Do I have

I'll move it.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I'll second it.

Without objection.

Now we'll turn to Mr.

Cross.
MR. CROSS.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
official discussion.
MR. CROSS.

The lesson is that we have too much

I don't disagree with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

I was told by a knowledgeable source that the
MR. MORRIS.
reason the dollar did not go down when we cut the discount rate was
that the long rate did not go down with it and that the exchange rate
Is that a
is more sensitive to long rates than to short rates.
plausible explanation to you?
I
I would think that certainly it's a factor.
MR. CROSS.
wouldn't give it total weight but, obviously, much of the effect on
the dollar is in the investment instrument and there's certainly a lot
And it's well known by
of attention paid to the long-term rates.
everybody in the market that those long-term rates have not been
So, I think it is certainly a
declining with our discount rate cut.
factor.
MR. MORRIS.
It does raise questions about our ability to
influence the exchange rate at this particular juncture.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If the long-term rate goes up because of
concern about inflation, I wouldn't think it would help the exchange
rate.
MR. MORRIS.
You wouldn't think so.
On the surface we seem
to have a perverse reaction. The domestic market is saying this is
inflationary and the international markets have a different view. But
this is the only concept that I've heard that has tied the two
together.
I don't know.
MR. TRUMAN. President Morris, research done by people here
does suggests that in econometric terms you get more of an explanation
of the dollar's movement from real long-rate differentials, as the
Chairman commented, than short rates. But they don't explain very
much of the total.
So, although by themselves they seem to provide
more [of the explanation] over the longer term than [do short rates],
it's not decisive.
It is one of the factors, but presumably not the
only one.

9/23/86

MR. WALLICH. But isn't the long-term prospect more durable
than the short-term prospect?
I'm speaking now of half a year or two
years?
MR. TRUMAN. You get more of that, Governor Wallich. That's
presumably what you're trying to pick up with the so-called
econometric exercises.
But I don't think they are very useful in
explaining wiggles from discount rate changes.
You need other things.
MS. HORN. So much of the public discussion about the
exchange rate seems to center on the mark and the yen and yet we focus
from time to time on how little the dollar has moved with respect to
other important currencies--those of Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and so
forth.
Is there any effort, nonpublic effort, being made with these
governments?
MR. CROSS.
Well, there's certainly an effort being made by
the Treasury and others to talk to the Taiwanese and Koreans on some
of these trade issues and other matters.
Of course, it cuts both
ways.
The Taiwanese currency, for example, went up with the dollar
and back down with the dollar.
So it hasn't affected the present
If you draw charts including more
exchange rate very much either way.
of these [other countries] you'd have a higher movement in the charts
than we typically see when we focus on industrial countries. But the
pattern is quite similar.
MR. TRUMAN. President Horn, there is a proposal by the
Taiwanese to apply U.S. trade legislation in reverse.
For countries
with which they had big trade surpluses they would cut the tariffs on
imports rather than seek a depreciation or appreciation of the
currency. That has not had any effect; it's one manifestation of this
kind of pressure.
MR. CROSS.
There's certainly a lot of discussion underway
with them to try to do something.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Taiwan strikes me as rather a special
case.
They have an enormous surplus, enormous reserves.
Their big
surpluses, fortunately anyway, are with the Germans and Japanese.
MR. CROSS.

Taiwan has the biggest surplus of any of these.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Current account surplus.

MR. CROSS.
By a long shot.
high reserves. Korea is different.

And they also have very, very

MR. TRUMAN. We don't regard Taiwan as a country
[unintelligible] this large surplus, [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
would help!

We ought to make it a 51st state if that

MS. SEGER. Did I hear you right that the Germans were on
both sides of the market within a fairly short period?
Are they
trying to target the dollar-mark relationship?

9/23/86

They
I'm not sure I would read all that into it.
MR. CROSS.
They did intervene when the
have not intervened on the low side.
dollar rose to 2.10; it did jump up very suddenly and that occurred at
a time when we were closed--at 5:00 or so in the morning here--and
they undoubtedly felt that they were taking a helpful step at that
A lot of the pressure on the other side has come from the
point.
other Europeans who feel stress and strain resulting from the strong
DM. As the dollar is weakening against the DM, the DM is tending to
strengthen against all currencies, particularly the EMS currencies.
And, as I said, they sold $4-1/2 billion worth of DM last week and
that begins to hurt them. So, they are the ones who have been
pressing, I suspect, for these understandings on the joint
intervention--that efforts should be made in order to prevent a
At least
further sliding of the dollar, not that we should let go.
that's the way I interpret it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They get a lot of pressure within Europe
when the Germans don't reduce their interest rates; that is one way of
Nobody wants a revaluation within Europe so they were
reading it.
driven to this intervention idea as a method of relieving pressure
within Europe against the general background of concern about the
dollar. But that's not what led to that particular decision.
MR. JOHNSON. Is there any notion of what the Germans will do
Will they just let them
with all these marks that are being sold?
It would be fundamental to their monetary policy.
stay out there?
These are basically coming out as marks that are
MR. CROSS.
in Euromark holdings. They have not allowed the Europeans to build up
marks within the Bundesbank.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. GUFFEY.
they're doing it?

Does that mean it's not inflationary the way

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. CROSS.
MR. TRUMAN.

Better get some--

Yes,

Indirectly
indirectly.

It has no

[direct]

Monetary

[effect].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

effect.

Somebody else in the market has to hold

them.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, somebody's got to be holding them.

MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but it doesn't have an effect on bank
reserves within Germany.
MR. CROSS.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. CROSS.

That's the only point I was trying to make.
But if somebody else within the European-It doesn't affect the Bundesbank.

9/23/86

MR. HELLER. But Sam, the other Europeans are intervening
mainly in deutschemarks and not in-MR. CROSS. Almost entirely.
There has been very little
dollar intervention by the other Europeans. There has been a little;
the Spanish have been picking up a few dollars as they position
themselves for entry to the EMS or one thing or another.
But
basically it has been overwhelmingly DM intervention and not dollar
intervention.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As Sam mentioned, and I would just
emphasize, there has been quite a pickup in the German economy after a
very sluggish performance. Nobody knows how long it will last.
But
at the moment their domestic demand is doing very well.
That,
together with fairly rapid monetary expansion, is why any ideas they
had of reducing their discount rate have been turned off.
From the
standpoint of results, if what we're interested in is growth in the
German economy, the most recent performance has been good; although
it's hard to know if it will carry them, at the moment it is good.
MR. PARRY. Do we anticipate that that growth will continue?
I noticed that the assumption about growth for the OECD countries has
a fairly sharp fall-off in the second quarter.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, it's certainly yet to be known, but we
anticipate the second quarter will continue at the rate the Chairman
has expressed which, depending upon which numbers you use, is either 8
or 14 percent at an annual rate. But on average, we don't see much
difference from the trend that they've had over the past couple of
years of something under 3 percent.
If anything, we see some tailing
off as we get into 1987.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Sternlight.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

No questions?

MS. SEGER. I have one: Why was it that we didn't know until
the last day about this tremendous additional need for required
reserves?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, under the system of contemporaneous
reserve accounting we depend on reports and revisions during the
reserve maintenance period. And sometimes we get sizable revisions.
If there is a revision midway through the period we can cope with that
fairly well, but we are vulnerable to hearing something as late as the
last day.
And we can even get a report after the period is over that
requirements were materially different from what we thought they were
on the last day we had an opportunity to operate.
I wouldn't say that
a revision of this size on the last day is typical but it's not
unheard of to get a pretty big revision very late in the period.
MR. BLACK. But it has to be in the non M1-type deposits
because you already know those required reserves.

9/23/86

MR. STERNLIGHT.
even in the M1-type.
MR. BLACK.

Well, I think we're getting some changes

But aren't they based on deposits earlier in the

period?
MR. KOHN. The non-Ml reserves are based on earlier deposits,
The M1 reserves, of course, are based on contemporaneous
right.
deposits and that's where this large revision is.
MR. BLACK.

Yes, I said it backwards, I'm sorry.

MR. STERNLIGHT.

Only the M1-types of deposits--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other comments or
questions on that, we will return to Mr. Sternlight and the topic we
covered to some degree last month about operations in coupon issues.
I'm sure we have all thought that through. I think what the issue
comes down to is whether we do it reasonably routinely two or three
times a year, the way we've been doing it, or whether we do it when we
think there's some purpose in doing it.
MR. RICE.
circumstances?

Why don't we do both?

Could we do it in both

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we can do it in both circumstances;
we could do it routinely and also when there's some purpose.
MR. RICE.

That's the point.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

Then we buy more longer-term securities.

Not necessarily.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It is, necessarily, if literally you go in
that market routinely and also-MR. RICE. You'd go in the market more frequently but you
wouldn't necessarily buy more.
MR. ANGELL.
times when--

But that also might mean that you would sell at

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this question of selling arose last
time.
I don't know whether there's anything more to be said on that.
The observed practice is that we don't sell.
MR. ANGELL.

It might have an announcement effect.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There's no doubt about that.
we don't sell--because we expect an announcement effect.

That's why

MR. BOEHNE. On this issue of liquidity, which is one of the
main reasons for reducing the holdings of long-term securities: That
table that Peter sent out shows that we have something like--this is
not an exact number--$90 billion in Treasury bills.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Very close to $100 billion.

9/23/86

MR. BOEHNE.
All right, close to $100 billion. Total
reserves in the entire System are around $50 billion, aren't they?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Right.

A good chunk of that $50 billion would be vault
MR. BOEHNE.
cash, so actually the deposits at Federal Reserve Banks would probably
be what--$25 to $30 billion?
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes.

So that means in terms
Or something like that.
MR. BOEHNE.
of liquidity that we already have in our portfolio something like
three times the amount of total reserves on deposit at Federal Reserve
Banks. Unless I'm missing something I don't see a liquidity issue
here.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I think the liquidity is very ample now. I
don't know if I'd draw that [conclusion] just from the comparison that
you made, but there has been ample liquidity. And it seems to me that
But we
liquidity has grown, even, with the policy of recent years.
have done a moderate proportion of our long-term provision [of
reserves] with occasional purchasing of coupon issues.
If two or three large banks get into trouble and
MR. GUFFEY.
we're providing reserves through the discount window, though, there
could be a liquidity problem even with these numbers.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, I don't think this [unintelligible].
We lend
Now, we do have other constraints than that [unintelligible].
dollars to-MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Twelve.
Twelve.

If we run into a $90 billion problem we might
MR. JOHNSON.
as well turn in our badge.
MR. BOEHNE.

We may not be routinely mopping up reserves.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the problem.

We can turn in the badge but still handle

MR. BLACK.
It does suggest, though, that if we get a chance
we ought to get rid of that collateral requirement on notes just in
case.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That I think we can do. But I think it is
right to say that one issue is the liquidity crisis and the other is
whether we see any purpose in buying coupons.
I guess my view on this is that the folks in the
MS. HORN.
Treasury Department ought to be in the debt management business and
that some sort of neutral stand by the Federal Reserve is an
Having said that, I think you could define policy as
appropriate one.
neutral if either we pursued a bills only approach or if we routinely
went in for preannounced, preagreed, purchases in the long-term area.

9/23/86

And since both long-term and short-term [securities] count as
collateral that doesn't help make the decision either. But those are
the two policies that I can define as neutral, if you will.
MR. JOHNSON.
If we could get the Treasury to stop extending
the term structure of the debt, it seems that a neutral policy would
be to buy whatever they issue in the same proportion. But they keep
extending the number of long bonds without a real rationale that I can
tell.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You find a portfolio distribution you like
I have
and the Treasury is maintaining a distribution that it likes.
no doubt of the volume this could involve should it never involve
buying, just rolling over what we have.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, I guess that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I [unintelligible]
buy in proportion to what their--

this with it.

We might

MR. JOHNSON. In proportion to what their needs were, which
would mean we would be in the market on a regular basis but for small
amounts.
MR. RICE.
It seems to me that it's a potentially useful tool
that we might not want to give up.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
talking about-MR. RICE.

I'm not talking about giving it up;

I'm

You give it up if you don't use it every once in a

while.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the issue comes down to.

Well, that's the question.

That's what

MR. RICE.
I can imagine times--not often--when there might
be a shortage of bills and we don't want to increase that shortage of
bills in the market and there may be some long-term securities
available.
I have no objection to buying long-term
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
securities when there's a good reason for buying them. My question is
whether any particular purpose is served when there's no reason to buy
them. I think you want to argue that this [routine buying] keeps the
machinery oiled or something. That's the argument.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. A corollary argument to that is that
if you completely stop doing it except in extraordinary circumstances,
that too involves an announcement effect. At some point you're going
to have to answer the question: Why aren't you buying long-term
securities anymore?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I have no trouble answering that question
If we wanted to adopt that policy we
as to why we're not buying.
would say we're not buying them anymore except when some purpose is
served in buying them.

9/23/86

I think the idea that we control a long-term
MR. MORRIS.
position by not rolling over completely all of the maturing issues-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MORRIS.
upset about?

Certainly, that helps you.

Is that something that the Treasury would be

MR. STERNLIGHT. They would not be bothered by our leaning
more toward the short-term option.

buying.

I would do that if we're going to continue
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I would go very short and pretty soon.
MR. RICE.

Would buying smaller amounts have an announcement

effect?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we'd [unintelligible] if we buy
small amounts now, and even if we can, if we're going to do it at all.
That is my impression.
MR. STERNLIGHT. I wouldn't see any significant announcement
I don't think
effect from leaning toward the shorter options.
[unintelligible].
SPEAKER(?).

No, no.

From buying smaller amounts?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, I don't mean that.
smaller amounts in the market when we buy.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

From buying

I don't know how much "smaller" would be-We don't buy.

What's the average amount?

MR. STERNLIGHT. In typical trips to the market recently it
has been something like $1 billion or $1-1/2 billion, in that kind of
range. We only did $4 or $5 billion [unintelligible].
We could
certainly buy a couple of billion.
MR. RICE.

You could certainly buy a couple of hundred

million.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can buy it if you [unintelligible].
Even $1 or $1-1/2 billion isn't very much; it's pretty trivial
considering the volumes in the Treasury market.
MR. MORRIS. But you could generate that leeway very easily
by just failing to roll over part of our holdings.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No doubt you can protect the liquidity
position by going shorter on the rollovers.
MR. MORRIS.
If the Treasury doesn't object, it seems to me
that would be the answer. You could have your cake and eat it too.

9/23/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, there's no question you could do
It just leaves the question--.
that.
That is kind of in between.
It's not like it's [unintelligible] every time we buy a coupon issue.
There is no other reason.
I personally wonder why we're doing it.
The answer I get is: to keep the machinery oiled.
I don't know what
that means.
MR. RICE.

To keep people from being surprised.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If you have a purpose, you want to

surprise.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that if we do not want to sell,
and that presumably is the consensus, we ought not to buy as long-term
as we've been buying. That would maintain more liquidity. If you can
never sell then there is merit in shortening the maturities that you
do buy.
But presumably we learn something about the
MR. MORRIS.
functioning of the long-term market by seeing a response to our
I assume that's where Peter-operations.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That, I think, is one argument.

MR. MORRIS.
It's not a matter of oiling the machinery; it's
really having a test that we participate in to see how the machinery
is working.
SPEAKER(?) But in general the Treasury market is very broad
and very deep.
If you just keep-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't want to prolong this discussion or
There's a lot bigger
add to it.
Ordinarily, it's working just fine.
volume going through the market every day than what we're doing. We
might want to know how it's working at some point of strain or
whatever. Then I have no problem. I have no compunction about buying
long-term securities when there's a purpose here.
MR. JOHNSON.

Have we bought coupons for a purpose at times?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
but not recently.

Not for a long time.

Historically, yes,

MR. STERNLIGHT.
I might point out that sometimes in those
periods of strain, we feel constraints--that we should not get in the
market because we don't want to be seen as interfering with the
market's own adjustment process.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. That's the concern that I have: If
you withdraw from the market completely, do you create a situation
where you're so inhibited about going into the market that in
precisely the circumstance that you might want to go in you are just
scared to death to do so because the announcement effect would be
bigger then?
I don't know.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I will give you an example.
Ordinarily, if we had a strong reason for going in, the announcement
effect might be welcomed. If we really thought the market was in a

9/23/86

panic, say, and we wanted to show some support in the market, we would
want an announcement effect.
An announcement effect would have been
more important in July. But taking the last few weeks, I don't know
whether we had any particular reserve need which was suitable-MR. JOHNSON.

I think we did.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we might have argued we were going to
buy anyway and with the long-term rates backing up and the new rate
[unintelligible] it might have been quite reasonable to have bought
long-term securities.
Now, would we have been better off or worse off
if we had decided in the last few weeks to do that against the
background of a reserve need when we had no purpose--just a matter of
having been in there and only been in for periods of that sort.
That's an arguable point.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just to take your example and make
it a little more pointed: My personal instinct is that if that very
touchy interval a week ago, last Thursday-Friday, also had been one of
those intervals when the market in the normal course might have
expected us to be doing something, I think it would have been easier
to do something.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's what I'm saying: you could get in
between cases of that sort.
But we're so constrained now, we could
[only] do it when we're supplying reserves permanently. Anyway, the
chances of that arising coincident with a period of that sort are
remote.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

I don't think they are that remote

at all.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does anybody else want to express a
view on this subject?
If not, the issue having been raised we'd
better arrive at some conclusion. One option is merely to do more or
less what we have been doing, which doesn't exclude, obviously, doing
it on special occasions and [leaning toward] the shorter [maturities]
in refundings.
The other option would be to [cut back] in our already
pretty limited operation of being willing to do it--I don't hear
anybody saying we never should do it or even that we should be all
that reluctant if there is a need or some positive rationale--but
confine ourselves as to when there is some positive rationale other
than that we haven't done it for six months. These are the two
choices.
Who prefers option one, continuing fairly routine [purchases
of coupons]?
Most people prefer that so we'll continue that fairly
routine-MR. JOHNSON. But we will go short on the refunds
[unintelligible]? At what pace are we going to roll them over?
MR. ANGELL.

That's not

[unintelligible]

three years.

MR. JOHNSON. We could thin out the market
depending on the pace that we--

[unintelligible],

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't think it makes much difference in
the market because now they have allocated these securities especially
to us anyway and we can--

9/23/86

MR. STERNLIGHT.

Yes, that's

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
doesn't

[unintelligible]

in the market.

We can just go to shortening, which

affect the market at all.
MR. JOHNSON.

Okay.

MR. STERNLIGHT. As to how short we would be, I don't know.
On this last quarterly rollover when the Treasury was offering roughly
equal amounts of 3-year, 10-year, and 30-year issues, we did about 2/3
in the short option and correspondingly small amounts in the two
I think leaving those longer options still smaller
longer options.
but keeping some minimal contact with the-[Why do you] say you're keeping contact
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
with [the market] if you're buying them directly from the Treasury and
never selling them?
I don't
Yes, I don't think they are being sold.
MR. ANGELL.
think there's any reason to be in the 10- and 30-year issues if you're
not going to be able to sell.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, having some small holding of them can
I wouldn't make a whole
be useful in our lending securities program.
lot of that, but after Drysdale it was useful to have securities that
we could lend just to help sort out delivery problems in the markets.
MR. HELLER.
Where do you plan to be, roughly, if you talk
Now we have 48 percent,
about the percentage of total portfolio?
Two or three years from now where do
which is about a record high.
you think we'll be?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
continue to creep up.
MR. HELLER.

I think the proportion of bills will

To 55,

60 percent?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
I think it will
continuing what we are doing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

In bills.

continue to creep up,

Coupons would presumably get

shorter?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
Yes,
shorten on this rollover--

the coupon holdings would tend to

MR. HELLER.
So you're taking about every two years or so
another 5 percentage points up there.
Is that roughly the result of-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It depends upon whether the money supply
continues to expand at the rate of recent years.
The marginal
increase will rise with more bills, but as he said-MR. HELLER.

Is it by a large rise or--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It depends upon

9/23/86

MR. HELLER.

It depends on the rollover, the runoff of the

coupons.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

No, because they'll be rolled over into

coupons.
MR. HELLER.

They're going to the short end.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Short coupons, but they'll still be in

coupons.
MR. GUFFEY. Traditionally, or within the last few years,
we've done a couple of bill purchases in providing longer-term

reserves and the market expects that.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

[You mean] a couple of coupon purchases.

MR. GUFFEY. Yes, coupon purchases. Does this in any way
alter that policy? Would we not do a coupon pass if-MR. STERNLIGHT.
what we've been doing.

I understood the consensus to be to continue

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
small amounts.

The consensus was to continue to do it in

MR. GUFFEY. And you'd just shorten it up by not taking as
much on new issues then?
By not taking as much of the long options.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. GUFFEY.

Yes, on new issues.

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. KICHLINE.

Right.
[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. The inventory pattern that you have
and fourth quarters I know is related to autos, but what
you have that that disinvestment in the third quarter is
come about--particularly in light of the numbers that we
inventories in July?

for the third
indication do
likely to
have for

MR. KICHLINE. What we have in terms of nonfarm inventories
in the third quarter is a runoff of nearly $12 billion, annual rate,
in constant dollar terms. We have nonfarm inventories excluding autos
rising about $9 billion. So the story is really very much an auto
story, with a decline in auto stocks of about $21 billion in real
terms in the third quarter. The numbers in the report in July were a
little curious in the auto sector. They run counter to this and, as
far as we know, the folks at BEA have other information they use in
putting the numbers together. As you know, inventories are a wild
card in all of this and I don't have any particular faith in a given
number. But we do know what's happening to measures of auto stocks.
And I would say that we have this forecast of a $21 billion runoff and
an increase of $12 billion in the next quarter within a few billion.

-13-

9/23/86

I think it's safe to say autos are largely driving that.
autos we have small increases.

Outside of

You have
MR. PARRY. The other issue is on net exports.
roughly a $17 billion growth in the second half coming from net
Going to the July data again, the fact that you get an
exports.
improvement of roughly $7 billion in the third quarter looks a little
suspect at this point.
MR. KICHLINE.
these questions.

I have a colleague who has answered many of

In
I agree that the July data were disturbing.
MR. TRUMAN.
fact, as far as the trade balance itself, the trade deficit in the
third quarter would be larger than in the second quarter, which was
In terms of GNP accounts,
essentially unchanged from the first.
however, two things are operating. One is the deflation; prices are
rising for imports and in some sense that's taking back, so quantities
are not rising as rapidly. On the other hand, when you're going
through the trade numbers to the GNP accounts, there's about $3
billion at an annual rate that's accounted for by gold. Gold comes
out of trade, both imports and exports, when it goes into GNP
accounts.
The negative swing is because of what's been going on in
gold trade going from second quarter to third quarter; that swing
isn't reflected at all in the GNP accounts.
So I think it's fair to
say that while we don't know what the revised figures will be when
they come out at the end of this month they could well show worse
Our sense is that
numbers for July than the preliminary estimates.
those are odd numbers and we are assuming they will be offset in part
by August and September in the trade balance.
MR. PARRY. I get the impression that your level of
confidence is not the highest on that one.
MR. TRUMAN.
confirming evidence.
MR. PARRY.

I think Jim summarized our sense of a lack of

Okay.

MR. TRUMAN. On the other hand, to the extent that other
aspects of the forecast are beginning to fall into place we had hoped
that this one, too, would turn-MR. PARRY. The improvement in, let's say, the period from
the fourth quarter of '86 to the fourth quarter of '87 certainly looks
reasonable; it's that pattern in the last half.
MS. HORN.
Staying on the trade number for just a moment: If
for some reason that projected trade number didn't come to pass, there
might be implications for the inflation number. If you get more
stimulus from the deficit than you're projecting and less from the
trade accounts, then that might cause you to revise your inflation
number.
Inflation would be worse then.
MR. KICHLINE. Yes, to some extent our view is that some of
the inflation coming from the dollar is a matter of timing. We've
been seeing those price increases and it's a question of how they feed
through. Obviously, we have weaker domestic markets. Out of the

9/23/86

forecast of 3 percent real growth next year, a little over a third of
that comes from net exports.
So if you took away those exports the
direct effect is rather large; and you can clearly have indirect
effects, feedback effects, in domestic income. So, if you were to
assume no improvement whatsoever, I think you're talking about a
pretty sick domestic economy unless we have other things wrong.
MR. PARRY.

Yes, it's other things equal.

MR. BLACK. Jim, do you have a CPI figure for all items other
than food and energy?
MR. KICHLINE.
MR. BLACK.

It's up 3/10ths.

3/10ths.

Thanks.

MR. FORRESTAL. Jim, can I ask about the unemployment
I would have thought that the unemployment numbers would be
numbers?
a bit lower than they are in your forecast for those two quarters.
Or are the numbers about right, do you
Are those [unintelligible]?
think?
We
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I don't think I'd make big changes.
have a number for August of 6.8 percent and an average of 6.9 percent
If anything, I might change it a tenth, clearly
in the third quarter.
on the downside.
I think that's what you're asking.
MR. FORRESTAL.

Yes.

MR. KICHLINE. The question as we go into the fourth quarter
is whether we're going to continue to see that sort of improvement in
a major way. We have assumed that we'll continue to have employment
growth but at a somewhat lesser rate than we've been seeing recently.
So, we have the unemployment rate drifting down only a tenth on a
If that's wrong, and given what we know now, I'd
quarterly average.
I don't
bend in the direction of knocking another tenth or two off.
feel particularly uncomfortable [with our forecast] but I think the
weighting of the evidence would be in the direction of a lower rather
than a higher rate.
MR. BOYKIN. Jim, one question on your forecast. The
positives are fairly heavily weighted on the improvement in exports.
As I think you know, our folks have been doing a little research
trying to figure out what has really happened to the dollar and our
judgment seems to be that it has declined somewhere between 7 to 9
If that should be true, that
percent as opposed to 25 to 30 percent.
I would just raise-would tend to postpone this improvement.
MR. TRUMAN.
But, President Boykin, we don't say this is our
forecast for the weighted average dollar and put that into an equation
and ignore the rest of the world. So, just because we use that as an
indicator of where the dollar is going does not mean that we have
ignored in this forecast the fact that the Taiwanese or the Korean
[currencies] have not been depreciating appreciably against the
dollar. We have gone back and looked at this more carefully over the
last several months and, in fact, I am much more comfortable than I
was before--at least to the extent that history can be any guide in
these matters--that in the forecast we have adequately taken account

9/23/86

-15-

of the lack of depreciation against the fixed [exchange rates of
certain countries] in the judgmental adjustments that we have been
making. Before, when we went back and looked at it, the whole
scientific evidence suggested that, if anything, we were going too far
in the direction of slowing down [the adjustment] for that reason
rather than not far enough. So there is something in the forecast
that takes account of the lack of depreciation against those
currencies explicitly, and it is based upon scientific evidence as
well, if you want to call it that. Now, we have a big problem in
terms of how we forecast what's going to happen to those currencies.
Basically what we have assumed is that they would maintain their value
in real terms against the U.S. dollar. So there would be no net real
appreciation or depreciation versus those currencies, on balance.
Given the fact that we're dealing with some countries who have rather
severe debt problems, that may or may not be appropriate. On the
So
other hand, we have enough trouble doing the forecasting we do.
there is an explicit assumption, essentially, about both the behavior
of those currencies and economies and an assumption about the course
of their exchange rates in our forecast [unintelligible].
MR. JOHNSON.

You have marked down some the G-10 countries'

growth?
MR. TRUMAN.

A touch, yes.

I haven't read the export numbers carefully
MR. JOHNSON.
enough to know: Have they been changed much since the earlier
forecast?
MR. TRUMAN.
previous one.

No, this forecast basically is the same as the

The
MR. JOHNSON. Okay, so something had to give there.
Is that made up in what has happened to the
growth abroad slowed.
exchange rate since that time?
MR. TRUMAN. No, the exchange rate forecast for once didn't
change at all just because we have the growth down by a tenth, or two
tenths if you combine the two years. This would tend to give us a
little more depressing effects on exports, as you suggested.
Basically, the order of magnitude would be about the same as the last

time. As for the impact on the overall forecast, on balance, I think
we took a little out of the 6-quarter change from where we were last
time.

MR. PARRY. I'd like to ask a question about the inflation
rate that you have, the implicit deflator, and the dollar. The very
small increase in inflation in the fourth quarter we talked about last
time and you mentioned that it's primarily the fact that the deflator
on imports is rising. That's part of the story in the sense that in
subsequent periods one would expect that as profit margins get narrow
the [price increases] would get passed on in terms of higher domestic
prices on goods that use imports as raw materials, and also in terms
of domestic goods that compete with imports. How do you explicitly
capture that?
Do you do deflators by sector or is this a judgment?
MR. KICHLINE. No, we do it by sector. And where that shows
up explicitly is in private domestic final purchases.
So you look at

9/23/86

consumption, you look at investment. For example, we have that total,
excluding food and energy, rising next year at a rate close to 4
So that's sort of an explicit recognition that these imports
percent.
prices are feeding through into final goods prices.
MR. PARRY.

So that would be adding how much--roughly a

percent?
MR. KICHLINE. I think we have something like 3/4 of a
percent or 0.8 percent.
MR. MELZER. Jim, how would you view the declines in the
consumer confidence indexes? Would you attach much significance to
that, what do you think the causes might have been, and so forth?
MR. KICHLINE. I have a hard time reading some of those.
They have bounced around. They're still at a high level but clearly
they are not as high as they were a number of years back. Some of
these reports--depending on whether you look at the Michigan or the
Conference Board surveys--tend to be sort of "things are good now but
In the Michigan case what often happens,
they're going to get worse."
and what I think was happening in August, is that it reflects an
increase in inflationary expectations that's very highly correlated
with food prices. Given the past behavior [of the index], whenever
food prices go up Michigan seems to pick up the view that things
aren't quite as good as they once were. So, at the moment I wouldn't
read a lot into the declines, given that the levels are still high and
given what we see going on in terms of actual expenditure patterns-that consumers have been quite happy to spend.
MR. MORRIS. The Michigan people also say that the index is
very sensitive to changes in interest rates, particularly the mortgage
rate, and the backing up of the mortgage rate may be [a factor].
MR. KICHLINE.

Yes.

MR. MORRIS. Jim, if I could ask you: You mentioned that
nondefense capital goods orders were down somewhat. What about total
durable goods orders?
MR. KICHLINE. The total was little changed. It was up 3.4
percent in July and down 2.6 percent in August. There was a big drop
in defense orders.
MR. PARRY.

Was there a revision in the--

MR. KICHLINE. No, the revisions, I think, are very small.
On nondefense capital goods alone it's virtually unchanged. That was
up 3.7 percent in July and down 2.8 percent in August.
MR. MORRIS. So we didn't get any confirmation of the
employment numbers in manufacturing?
MR. KICHLINE. No. Part of what's going on, though, is that
the aircraft area has been extremely volatile. It was up very sharply
in July and went down in August. Nondefense capital goods orders
excluding that aircraft component are still down in August but the
level is 3-1/2 percent above the second-quarter average. So I would

9/23/86

-17-

read that as something very helpful. The other development that is
encouraging is that office and computing machinery orders rose again.
They are now, as you know, at a low level; but they are 25 percent
above where they were in the second quarter. So there seems to be a
little life coming back in that high-tech area.
I was told by one computer company that
MR. MORRIS. Yes.
they are selling a lot to Korea and Taiwan, so maybe we'll-MR. PARRY. Do I remember correctly that you said most of
those major Boeing and McDonnell-Douglas orders were not booked yet?
MR. PRELL.

Yes, that is true.

MR. PARRY.

So there could be even greater strength coming

along.
MR. PRELL. They indicated in their release this morning that
those orders still aren't showing up in these latest figures.
MR. PARRY.

And they're big orders.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
economic outlook?

Do we have any general comments on the

MR. WALLICH. Could I say something about how difficult it
It's difficult for me to
seems to be at this stage to [look] forward?
[elaborate on] that, but I just want to make that clear.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, our view of the near-term outlook
is still pretty close to that of the staff. This upward revision in
growth of GNP in the second half makes sense to us in view of the
domestic automobile sales incentives and what appears to be some
I think the
improvement in the manufacturing sector in general.
longer-term prospects are a little harder to call. We're still
generally optimistic and we think the staff is perhaps about right in
In
projecting a moderate 3 percent rate of growth for next year.
fact, we tend to think that consumer spending and probably business
fixed investment might be a tad stronger. One reason is that we don't
think there will be quite as much of an increase in the cost of
capital and, therefore, that the new tax law will be less damaging to
capital spending than some economists believe--if you take into
consideration that the top corporate tax rate has come down and also
consider what has happened to individual income tax rates of dividend
recipients.
But all of this depends, I think, on interest rates and
And I think the risks have
inflation remaining relatively stable.
In
increased that such might not be the case on both fronts.
particular, the prospect for progress in reducing the federal deficit
looks a lot less favorable now.
I think the financial markets sense
this and that's one of the reasons we had the recent backup in
interest rates, which probably affected the decline in the stock
prices. The markets also are clearly more concerned now about the
possibility of a revival of inflation and neither of these kinds of
[developments] is good for the markets and neither is good for the

9/23/86

-18-

economy.
I hope we'll do everything we can to keep these things from
gaining momentum.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Conditions in our part of the Midwest, I think,
are very much unchanged.
The trends that have been in place most of
the year continue at about the same level.
But I continue to be
struck by this incredible dichotomy between the good sectors of the
economy and those that are relatively weak. There is nothing new
about that but that dichotomy certainly continues.
I think the
automotive sector, which Jim referred to, is rather phenomenal. Here
we have had the third year in a row of auto sales over 10 million,
which I think is a pretty good record, yet even now these incentive
programs just have a phenomenal effect because sales have literally
taken off. Construction activity in the Midwest continues at a pretty
high level. Residential construction throughout the District is
really quite strong; that's particularly true in Illinois where the
numbers are running well over the national average.
We are perhaps
slightly different from what Jim said on the commercial side; we are
stabilizing in our commercial construction but nonetheless stabilizing
at what seems like a pretty high level.
On the negative side, the heavy manufacturing news continues
to be pretty somber. There is no particular improvement. More and
more companies are continuing to shift their production offshore to
take advantage of lower wage rates.
They admit that they are late in
doing it but nonetheless see an opportunity to take advantage of that
trend. On the tax bill, those that I talk to on the heavy
manufacturing side are pretty glum as to the near-term effects that
the bill, assuming it gets passed, is likely to have. Our
agricultural directors report that we have had, really, a perfect
growing season and we're bracing for record production; the stories
one hears about the storage problems and what they're going to do with
all this are really quite phenomenal.
On the inflation side, I think the general outlook continues
to be favorable but there are just those few worrisome signs there.
As I suggested, housing starts in the Midwest are pretty strong.
In
some suburban Chicago areas we're having significant prices increases
--15 to 20 percent in the first six months of this year.
It's a very,
very, strong housing market and the prices are going up. We
anticipate that apartment rents will be up 5 to 10 percent in the
Chicago area. And, I think everybody expects that the prices of
imports, particularly cars, are going to begin to go up.
Offsetting
that, the labor news, as Jim suggests, continues to be good.
Threeyear contracts are prevalent and annual costs are very moderate.
I
talked to somebody last week who settled a three-year contract with
costs over the three-year period of 1 to 1-1/2 percent.
And the
companies are getting very, very significant work rule changes--that's
the big push now, of course. On the pricing side--perhaps not in
services, but certainly in manufacturing--there are pressures.
As to the [national] outlook, certainly our outlook is
consistent with the staff forecast. But I agree with Governor Wallich
that it's a very, very hard time to call it.
Everybody anticipates
that we're going to see export activity pick up and that at some point
imports will be under some constraint; but these events are certainly

9/23/86

getting to be long overdue. Therefore, I think it is a tough call to
judge just how strong the underlying strength of the economy really
is.
Perhaps this is one of those times that we just have to stand
back and see how things come in.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. The economic situation in the Twelfth District is
basically unchanged from the last meeting, but I think there are a few
In August, growth of
more signs of strength in the District.
employment in California was very rapid. And the July-over-July
increase for the entire District, which of course includes 9 states,
was a full percentage point greater than the national average, with
only Alaska and Oregon being under that average. Even in a few of the
problems areas of the District we see some glimmers of greater
strength. The mining industry got a boost recently in Utah with the
signing of a 4-year contract by Kennecott with the mining union that
is going to result in a resumption of production and will probably add
The
about 2,000 workers between now and the middle of next year.
It has been
lumber industry is doing quite well at the present time.
helped by several developments, including strong domestic demand for
lumber and a 22 percent increase in exports in the first half.
There's also an industry strike in British Columbia which is affecting
the Pacific Coast lumber industry positively. And there is an
expectation, in the industry at least, that the International Trade
Commission is going to find that British Columbia has subsidized softOn the
wood exports and that that's going to accrue to our benefit.
negative side, as far as the District is concerned, most of the talk
centers around the tax bill and is basically in line with what Si
Keehn mentioned.
Our forecast is similar to that of the Board staff's with the
exception that we don't have quite the same pattern for net exports
and inventories, particularly in the second half of 1986, and for
inflation over the entire period. We agree that the trade account is
likely to be an important source of growth in 1987 but we are not very
confident that the turnaround will occur in the third quarter or that
we'll get as much strength in the entire second half as indicated by
We looked at some data that we have for Pacific
the Board's forecast.
Coast customs districts, which represent about 25 percent of all
trade. Those data have a lot of problems, including the fact that
they are nominal--we don't have any deflators in them--but they do
indicate that the trade balance has deteriorated consistently through
It appears as though that deterioration is a result of greater
July.
imports from Canada, Mexico, and perhaps also the Pacific Basin mix.
In the inventory area, we see more strength in the third quarter and
perhaps a little less in the fourth.
I must admit that the
contribution to growth of $25.8 billion in the fourth quarter in the
Board's forecast is quite a bit more than we have. Also, we do not
have such a sharp fall-off--going from 5.6 to 0.9 percent--in final
sales.
So, there's quite a difference in pattern but we end up with a
real GNP growth which is not that much different for the second half.
Finally, I have a somewhat greater concern about inflation through
1987 than is in the Board staff's forecast. We talked about that a
little in the discussion. I think there is a chance that we'll see
more of an effect in other sectors of the passthrough of the higher
dollar cost of imports.
I also wonder if the growth rate of the
economy, averaging 3 percent between now and the end of 1987, would

-20-

9/23/86

enable producers to pass along larger price increases than are
incorporated in the Board staff's forecast. As a result, our
inflation rates have a tendency to be running about a percentage point
higher than those shown by the Board staff.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Is it settled?

What happened in that Weyerhauser strike?

MR. PARRY. We still don't know. It's mainly in British
Columbia and that's why it seems to be accruing to the benefit of-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARRY.

The one domestically has been settled.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARRY.

Weyerhauser in British Columbia?

It has been settled?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

On what terms?

I don't know what it was on
MR. PARRY. It was mainly rules.
is not nearly as optimistic as
wages.
because it is apparently accruing very much to the benefit of
is not as much affected-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARRY.

He didn't get a good settlement?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's forecast is a
I expect, as they do, that the economy will pick up in this
good one.
quarter and in the fourth quarter. However, I can't help noting some
areas of concern. The first is that the two areas of strength in the
economy--consumption spending and single-family residential
construction--while likely to maintain their strength, will be
That is, their rate of growth will
contributing less to the economy.
be decelerating and residential construction in the single-family area
will be offset by what's happening in multifamily housing
construction. And I'm mindful that the two components that we are
relying on to provide this pickup--that is, inventory accumulation and
an improvement in the external accounts--are areas that in the past
have proven difficult to forecast. As has been pointed out, we may
not see the degree of improvement in these components that we would
hope for. Therefore, I would see the risks of the forecast on the
I'm gratified, however, by the recent evidence of
down side.
improvement in the economy, particularly in the employment area, and
There seems to be an
also by the anecdotal evidence that has come in.
But I do see
improved sentiment in the business community as well.
the risks at this point on the down side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. The District continues to operate at a higher
level of business activity than the nation as a whole. Just one
indicator of that is unemployment, which for the District as a whole

9/23/86

-21-

has been running around 6 percent and around Philadelphia closer to 5
But we have noticed in the last couple of months that the
percent.
rate of change has slowed somewhat. That has not affected attitudes,
however, which I think are generally upbeat because of the higher
level. While people don't feel great about the future, they think

it's pretty good.
As I look at the national economy, I do think that the
statistics have improved a touch. I'm not sure how much I would make
of that but I think that is there. Largely because of the foreign
sector, how the economy in fact will turn out is very tough to call.
As a result, my convictions, and I sense the convictions of others, do
not run very deep about the economic outlook. I think we see this
more dramatically in the financial markets, which seem to act on
changes in sentiment, more than on the goods side. There is that
level of uncertainly and lack of conviction as to where we're going.
On the inflation side, I sense that there has been perhaps more than a
subtle change--that the concern about inflation as expressed in the
long bond market, and to some extent in the commodities market, is
there. And I think the message there for those of us who make
monetary policy is that perhaps we have run into some resistance point
on what we can do. Trying to bring all that down to a bottom line, I
would come out about where the staff is as far as numbers; but I would
emphasize that there's not a whole lot of conviction that lies behind
those numbers.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Looking first at the District, I think I
could say, Mr. Chairman, that conditions in the Southeast reflect
pretty much the imbalances that we see in the rest of the economy.
The energy states are especially weak, particularly Louisiana. We're
seeing a lot of out-migration from that state to other states,
particularly Mississippi, and that's causing unemployment rates in
those states to move up as well. We now have the distinction, dubious
as it may be, of having the highest unemployment rate in two states-in Louisiana and Mississippi it's over 13 percent. The agricultural
sector is also in bad shape, partly as a result of the drought that I
reported on before. We have had some recent rains in the area but
they've come too late to help most crops. The corn and soybean crops
are destroyed.

We've had some marginal benefit to some other crops

from that rain. The apparel and textile producers still are reporting
that they're not getting any particular benefit from the decline in
the dollar. They still say that foreign competition is coming in very
strongly and, of course, they are continuing their protectionist
cries, particularly from Congressman Jenkins. And I think we'll hear
more of this bill that the President vetoed. At the same time, some
of the apparel and textile people who have tried to carve a particular
niche in the market are doing better, particularly those who have not
only carved that niche but have improved their productivity through
greater automation. So it's a mixed picture in that industry; I
wouldn't say that it's completely negative.
General business conditions continue to be very good in the
urban areas, and this has given rise to more and more talk in a number
of states in the District of this dichotomy that somebody else has
talked about--where we have the rural areas not participating in the
general beneficial economic conditions and the urban areas doing quite

9/23/86

well.
That seems to be consistent throughout the entire District.
We
have seen a leveling off of single-family housing, but it's still at
fairly high levels and I think will continue to be a source of
strength in the local economy. Business attitudes are still fairly
positive, although I detect on the part of some people I've talked to
a waning of confidence just a bit.
That's particularly related to
uncertainties about the tax bill and the trade sector.
Interestingly
though, I don't hear at all any concerns about recession in the
District; and I don't hear very much concern about inflation,
notwithstanding what the markets seem to be telling us.
On the national level, I agree generally with the staff
forecast. I might have some marginal difference with respect to
unemployment, as I indicated earlier, and perhaps to inflation. But
those are very minor differences. I, too, would share the great
uncertainty that others feel about the direction of the trade deficit
and what that means for overall economic activity in 1987.
But in
general, I think the forecast is on target. And we can only hope that
the trade deficit will turn around in a short period of time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, on the national level I'd be
slightly less optimistic than the staff's forecast, but it's pretty
close. On the District level, I'm having a little change of heart; I
think my attitude is changing from one of pessimism to cautious
optimism. I don't want to damn this by faint praise but I, too, think
that we are seeing signs that we may be reaching the trough in the
Eleventh District.
The big increases in unemployment rates seem to be
over.
In Texas, in both July and August, rates were below the rates
for May and June.
Those July and August rates, however, were very
high: August was 9.2 percent compared with the 6.8 percent national
average, but that's down from the 10+ percent that we had a little
earlier.
Unemployment rates [are high] in Louisiana; Bob Forrestal
mentioned that. New Mexico is about the same as Texas.
Our nonfarm
employment may be near the end of its major decline.
We did see a
little rise in July in Texas and New Mexico and that comes after five
consecutive months of decline.
So, hopefully, we're seeing a turn
there. The manufacturing sector remains weak but may be close to
bottoming out.
Some areas of strength we're seeing include electrical
and electronic equipment as well as aircraft and parts. Our
construction contracts seems to be stabilizing, at least for now.
Construction values remain about 20 percent below year-ago levels.
The most pronounced reduction in the energy sector activity also
appears to be behind us.
Our rig count is flat or rising slightly-from very low levels, of course. Our energy sector employment now is
declining slowly in contrast to massive layoffs just a few months ago.
Even in agriculture, the livestock producers are feeling a little
better because of higher beef prices.
So in summary, Mr. Chairman, I
would say that maybe we have a little cautious optimism for the
Eleventh District now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
In the Tenth District
I'm not sure that the cautious optimism is present.
The District as a
whole, as I think the Committee knows, has not performed as well over
the past year or two as the national economy--measured by either total

9/23/86

employment or unemployment numbers, personal income gains, and things
of that nature. There is the difference between the urban and the
rural that I've spoken of before. However, in my most recent meetings
with businessmen, I found the views of urban businessmen across a
fairly wide range of activities a bit more pessimistic than in the
past.
That is to say, they understand that the economy even in the
urban areas is operating at a fairly low level, but they don't have
any great optimism that there is any light at the end of the tunnel
that gives them much hope that it's going to improve over the near
term. That seems to me to be a bit of a change.
The other side of
that coin is that they have apparently no concern, or little concern,
that inflation or inflationary expectations will be revived. As a
result, in the urban areas activity is rocking along at kind of an
unsatisfactory rate but at least on the positive side.
On the agricultural side on the other hand, there is very
little improvement other than in the areas Bob Boykin just referred
to--that is, in the red meat sector prices of both hogs and cattle
have come up and are at very good levels. There are good profit
margins simply because the [cost of] feed that is necessary to put
those animals to market is less; as a result the profit margins in red
If you look at net farm income,
meat industries are very good.
however, you could build a fairly good case that it will be about the
same level in 1986 as it was in 1985.
If you look a little deeper you
will find, however, that the net farm income is largely attributable
to government programs.
It's merely a transfer from the federal
Treasury to the producers that gives you net farm income that is
nearly equal to last year. On the other hand, the net exports of
agricultural products will be at the lowest level in 20 years.
We
will have a net export position of agricultural products that is
something over $7 billion; a couple of years ago that was in the $30
billion range.
So, the impact of the dollar hasn't hit, and probably
won't hit, in that sector simply because there is production beyond
the U.S. boundaries that is supplying the demand that we used to
supply. So the outlook in the farm area is not very bright.
In the energy area, much as Bob Boykin has indicated, there
is a little activity but there's still a great reluctance to do very
much exploration simply because of the uncertainty of what OPEC's
impact will be on energy prices.
They are afraid not that the oil
price will go to $20 but rather that it will go back down to $8 or $10
and they will be in the midst of drilling a well that will not pay off
if they are successful in hitting oil.
So, overall, the District is
rocking along at a very low level.
But in a sense the tenor seems
positive, except for the foreclosures in the agricultural sector and
the lack of activity in the energy sector.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Thank you. I find the staff forecast in the
Greenbook conservative--not in the sense that I think the outlook for
real growth is too low, but in the sense that the very heavy reliance
on improvement in net exports is accompanied by what I judge to be
some consecvative assumptions about performance of some of the other
sectors in the economy.
In particular, I have in mind consumer
spending, government purchases, and possibly investment a bit. My
point is that even if the improvement in net exports turns out to be
delayed, or more modest than envisioned here because of some of the

-24-

9/23/86

other conservatism built into this forecast, it seems to me that we
have a good chance of realizing something like the outlook expressed
It seems
in the Greenbook, or perhaps even something a touch better.
to me that at the national level the latest statistics are a bit
I am not sure how much to make of all of that. We have
stronger.
seen these little spurts in the past; the most recent one, I think,
It is certainly too early,
was late last year and maybe into January.
as far as I can tell, to know if that will be sustained.
In the District, though, a more upbeat tone--I might say
almost distinctly more upbeat--has emerged in the last couple of
months.
A variety of factors are contributing to it; of course, the
In the District
national auto sales situation that [unintelligible].
in general, retail sales have been good and the retailers I have
talked to said back-to-school sales were reasonably strong. The wood
products industry, which is very important, is in general doing well.
Defense spending has provided
Summer tourism was good, if not great.
a lift in some locations in the District, and I think there is a
growing conviction that the problems in agriculture are close to
Now that's not to say that the emergence from the
bottoming out.
But I
bottom is at hand or that it would be significant emergence.
think people are taking some comfort simply in the fact that it looks
like the bottom may have been reached. The economy in the Twin
Cities, which accounts for a good deal of what goes on in the
So, in general, I would
District, continues to do very, very well.
say that attitudes are improving, at least, in the Ninth District and
that there are some signs of economic activity improving.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

I would say about the same for the Eighth
MR. MELZER.
District. The most recent indicators we have all would show an
improvement, particularly in July. For example, nonagricultural
employment was up over 9 percent and we even had an improvement in
Retail sales over the second
manufacturing of 1-1/2 percent or so.
quarter were quite strong, at a 7-1/2 percent annual rate of increase.
Also, both residential and nonresidential construction were strong in
July, although looking at those sectors over the period of a quarter,
In terms of
they declined somewhat, as you might expect.
conversations I have had, there has been an improvement in sentiment
among businessmen; retailers said the same kinds of things Gary was
referring to in terms of good back-to-school sales.
On a broader basis, one of the things I have given some
thought to is the question of whether this concern about inflation is
something that is just reflected in the markets or whether it has
The
perhaps what some people would consider more solid underpinnings.
first observation that I would make is that while often markets
overact in the short run, I think we are looking at something that has
been developing over a period of some months--going back to early
April--with respect to how long rates have performed relative to short
rates.
So I am not inclined to think that this is just a passing
fancy, particularly when you look at the kinds of volumes that are
traded--for example, $100 billion a day in the government securities
I tend to think of that as condensing the best odds and
market.
expectations of a broad cross section of people, so I am inclined to
Also, one of the things you read about is
put some credence in that.
the Commodity Research Bureau Index and I asked some of our people to

-25-

9/23/86

take a look at that. Since June that overall index of about 27
industrial and agricultural commodities is up at an annual rate of,
say, 11 to 12 percent. If you take out the 7 grains in the index,
which tend to be very much influenced by the government's support
programs, it is up at an annual rate approaching almost 30 percent.
So, just on that score, I think there are some things happening with
respect to underlying commodity prices that go beyond pure speculative
influence. What I have been trying to pick up, and haven't really
picked up yet in talking to people, is whether the behavior of
purchasing managers who are running inventories has changed at all.
Going back over a period of time when I have asked these questions
there has been really no expectation of inflation; accordingly, people
aren't really building any inventories. That is one of the things I
am going to be looking for in talking to people but I haven't picked
up any evidence of that yet.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In terms of the general outlook, I'd
piggy-back on a comment Mr. Stern made earlier: my GNP forecast on
balance looks a lot like the staff's but it looks that way
notwithstanding the fact that we have a smaller improvement in the
trade deficit than is in the Greenbook. On the trade deficit
question, I have been on the skeptical side in terms of the rate at
which that could turn around, and I still am. But for what it is
worth, our people did a little informal survey this past week of a
cross section of a couple dozen firms, major and minor; and for the
first time that survey does suggest some things that are consistent
with at least a stabilization, if not some improvement, on the trade
side. It comes through both in terms of export opportunities being
there in ways that they were not there before and in terms of import
price pressures beginning to work their way in. One of the surprising
things we found in the process of doing this survey--at least
surprising to me--was the emphasis that people on both sides put on
commitments and long lags in orders and processing. One example of
that was even in soft goods--clothing and that type of thing. The
lags are a year or more, growing out of commitments and contractual
obligations that are standing in the way of adjustments being made
even in the face of more favorable conditions. Now, there is nothing
spectacular there--no hard evidence--but at least it is a bit of an
indication that maybe the tide is turning, notwithstanding the
horrible July number and the prospect for the third quarter as a whole
still probably being pretty lousy.
On the inflation side, I have some of the same concerns that
Bob Parry and Tom Melzer talked about. Our forecast is one in which
we have the inflation rate roughly a half percentage point higher than
what is in the Greenbook. In some sense that is not altogether
alarming, but what bothers me is that it wouldn't take a whole heck of
a lot to make me want to mark up that price forecast. Looking around,
one of the things that really has disturbed me of late is this pattern
that we see in domestic automobile prices--Ford, I guess it was, last
week announcing price increases on domestic models of up to 9 percent.
In the context of the anecdotal reports that people have referred to,
I think that is, to some extent, a matter of concern. In the staff
forecast, by the end of next year they have the CPI, excluding energy,
at 4-1/2 percent. I don't know what the threshold is but my hunch is
that if that were above 5 percent, or if the deflator were above 4

9/23/86

percent, we would have a very, very difficult situation on our hands
by the end of next year. In that setting I, too, don't think that
what we are seeing in the financial markets is completely irrational.
There is some basis for concern there, notwithstanding the fact that,
as Emmett Rice and others have said, there are some downside risks in
the economy itself. It goes without saying that these patterns that
we have seen in the last couple of weeks in the financial markets
serve as a reminder of the vulnerabilities that are there--whether in
terms of just volatility or these very, very sharp changes in
financial asset prices over periods of weeks and months.
That in
itself has the potential to undermine confidence in ways that could be
quite counterproductive in terms of economic performance.
So, I can't
disregard what the financial markets are doing at all, and I think
what they are saying is that you better be careful here boys.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Are you prepared to be careful, Mrs. Horn?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That was a

[generic] term.

MS. HORN. Well, taking off on that lead, the numbers in the
Cleveland forecast look quite a bit like the Greenbook forecast. But
perhaps, whereas I sense from the Greenbook that the Board staff tends
to look at those numbers and see the glass as half full, I see the
glass as half empty. I suppose that is a result number one, of the
situation in the Fourth Federal Reserve District, and number two, of
my growing disappointment that the expectations I had earlier in the
year for lower interest rates, a higher stock market, and low oil
prices coming through haven't yet materialized.
Or, if they have
materialized, they haven't been in the quantity that I expected.
From the Fourth District vantage point I am unable to report
developments that suggest a step-up in the pace of expansion over the
balance of the year. The flat economy has meant a flat capital goods
market and that is key for the Fourth District. Given that, together
with strong competition from imports, many District producers--notably
of steel--are tempering their optimism and are starting another wave
of restructuring and serious consideration of cost cutting.
I see
this attitude not only in steel, but in autos, auto-related
industries, machine tools--what is left of them--and machinery-making
in general. Although we are not talking about declining production-things aren't that bad--we are talking about decreasing market shares
in intense competition. All of that is making people think about
survival: about shutting down less efficient facilities and basically
consolidating and down-scaling operations generally. I don't think
the mood is bleak, but I think there is much less optimism on futures
markets and the future ability to gain market share than there was,
say, a year ago when there was more hope for what the exchange rate
would do for our world in the Fourth Federal Reserve District.
So, I
would say that in this next year in the industrial Midwest--or what is
left of it--we would have a turbulent time, with the next steps being
toward restructuring.
Businessmen and the directors in our District talk more and
more about their disappointment with the budget process.
I am not
sure how to evaluate that because there are the two sides--one is the
deficit reduction and the other is the tax increase they are about to
be hit with, or may be about to be hit with. That is something that I
hear talked about more and more as time passes.
I think the overall

9/23/86

effect of these factors is working in the direction of weakening the
foundation for the expansion next year. With the additional drag on
capital goods that we will see from the tax package, I see little
likelihood of a strengthening in the traditional capital goods market.
I don't yet detect nervousness about inflation; people seem prepared
to watch prices go up and attribute that to the end of the oil price
contribution to the indices. Cost control efforts really are already
intense and they will intensify. One could argue on the good side
from that, but even among businessmen I find skepticism from pushing
too hard or relying on that on the inflation front.
Of course, on the
inflation front, if the deficit is not going to be brought down then
the load will fall once again on monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
I certainly welcome all the comments about
market commodity prices.
I would review just a minute by suggesting
that we have a severe commodity price deflation on our hands and I
think it is encouraging that our accommodation of the world's demand
for financial assets has, in a sense, blunted this deflationary move.
It seems to me that there are ample signs that the accommodation of
this demand has worked. But it is very difficult to stop the
deflationary move without creating some changes in expectations, which
are most apt to show up in precious metal prices.
And any index that
has those precious metals in it is going to show that kind of
movement, which I think is what you might expect.
But the index
numbers that I look at do not show any appreciable change.
I think it
would be appropriate for us to recognize that there is a tremendous
supply side force out there in regard to commodity supplies worldwide.
I don't think that has changed.
I would agree, however, that we are
undoubtedly somewhat vulnerable to any outside force that might create
a particular kind of shortage that might produce a price rise.
It
seems to me that Si Keehn had it exactly right when he said that this
is probably the time to wait and see what happens.
I am very
impressed by the fact that the United States and Canada now have the
best record in year-over-year wage changes.
That is, our 3 percent
wage increase, year-over-year, is only beaten by Canada's 2.9 percent.
A couple of Scandinavian countries are very close, whereas many of our
major trading partners are running much heftier wage rate increases.
I am somewhat encouraged by those wage rate movements, which may
provide some stimulus abroad.
That is, those wage rates along with
their low inflation rates, it seems to me, are going to provide some
real substance to better final demand in Germany and Japan. So I
think that is encouraging. I am in tune with the staff's forecast
both for GNP and prices.
I think there is a grave variation in terms
of accuracy of these forecasts dealing with the inventory numbers and
the export timing change; but I feel-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I have sensed a change in the
spirit of my directors and businessmen in New England in the last
month. There is a much more upbeat feeling than there was in the
summer.
I find some evidence now that some of our high-tech companies
have begun to say that maybe the yen has gotten to a level where they
can compete with the Japanese and they are planning to try to get back
some of the market that they have lost to the Japanese in the past few
years.
It is the first sign of that sort that I have heard.

-28-

9/23/86

who has a very unusual company called
and their sole business is making equipment and special
He said
are a very good
that on what he calls his consumer products,
economic indicator; and he has noted that in the past two weeks they
have had a big increase in orders for the
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

American products?

But he also sells abroad and
American products.
MR. MORRIS.
his European orders are going up, too, for whatever that is worth.
Boston seems to be the one exception in this downward trend in
I went to a
commercial office building. Our boom is still going on.
meeting a week or so ago on new office buildings and hotels planned
for Boston and, despite the fact that we have a lot of space coming on
stream in the next six to eight months, we still have a tremendous
It is sort of like
array of office buildings and hotels planned.
I figure we're going to have our glut
Dallas and Houston used to be.
but it is a ways off. For people renting space in our building we
have a new program in which we are trying to stretch out leases to
nail down today's high rental values because we would like to have
everybody locked in when the glut hits.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That is a great expression of confidence
about inflation as well as probably an escalator! Mr. Heller.
I think we are making amazingly good progress
MR. HELLER.
this late in the recovery. Overall, I agree with what most people
have said: that there is a more balanced economy than there was last
I agree with
year and very little in excesses actually developing.
the staff that consumer spending is very well sustained and I think
consumers are going to get a second wind next year when the tax cuts
become effective. We see behavioral changes taking place already,
both in the financial markets and as far as planned purchasing is
Investment will be slow in coming, but at least we have
concerned.
bottomed out, especially in the agricultural and energy area; so we
don't have any more drag from those sectors in the future. And the
government deficit reduction program, disappointing as it is, will be
a positive contribution that should be particularly good in the
financial markets.
I am less optimistic on the trade front, as I said
I think our exports won't increase very rapidly but at
previously.
So,
least the erosion in GNP due to imports will tend to stop.
overall, the export sector will tilt a bit more in our favor and that
On the inflation front, I am
also reduces some of those imbalances.
amazed by the good news that came in this morning. It is very
heartening. And I fully agree with what Wayne was saying about wage
When you look at the European wage increases, given the
increases.
high unemployment rates, it is amazing that they are all running in
the 5 percent range--much above the 3 percent range that we heard here
in other comments before. Overall, I think it is a very satisfactory
performance with fewer imbalances than we have had in the past.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know about those wage increases;
those wage increases are low but so is productivity.

-29-

9/23/86

MR. ANGELL. Productivity in the service sector is low but I
don't think we know how to measure it.
Productivity in the goods
producing sector remains right at the 3.2 percent level that it has
been at for some time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER.
I have just a couple of comments since I have
heard just about everything said that I was going to say.
In general,
I am probably a hair more pessimistic than the staff, primarily
because when I look at the auto industry I just have a feeling that we
are going to give back more next year than the staff is assuming. I
am impressed with the current sales level--no doubt about that--which,
I guess, shows what low interest rates will do and how inattentive a
lot of consumers are.
But I think that this is not all a net gain.
I
think the give-back will show up, particularly in the first quarter.
Also, I am just very nervous about the impact of tax reform on a whole
lot of things, but particularly on business spending on new plant and
equipment and on office buildings which, of course, are already under
the gun.
I think that is just going to provide one more discouraging
influence.
We have been talking about this trade turnaround for a number
of months and expecting that to provide quite a bit of support for the
economy, and I certainly hope that happens.
But Senator Riegle sent
me a little story which, with your permission I would like to tell,
because I think it demonstrates how difficult it is to turn off the
import competition. This involves one of his constituent companies
out in Michigan; they produce
Being nonmechanical, I have no idea what those are, by the way, but apparently
they are very important in the production of engines. The company
supplies parts for about three-fourths of the engines produced in this
country and the Japanese had been their primary competition. They
have revamped their entire operation, they have spent heavily on R&D
and on new equipment, etc., they have gotten wage concessions, and
they have tried to imitate the Japanese in the labor-management
relationship.
They have done remarkably well in dealing with the
Japanese [competition] and they are now selling their main part for
$5.50.
Now, all of a sudden, the Koreans are calling on their major
customers in this country and are offering them very similar products
at $3.50.
This isn't something I picked up; it came from Don Riegle.
But I think it is very indicative of how tough this job is going to
be, particularly when we haven't seen the dollar deteriorate vis-a-vis
the Korean currency.
I just hope and pray that we can get some
movement in the currencies of these newly industrialized countries,
particularly in the Far East, or I don't think we are going to see
this big turnaround that we are counting on.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You think that big improvement in
[unintelligible].
How are they going to pay the interest on their
debts?
MS. SEGER.
MR. ANGELL.
[unintelligible].
MS. SEGER.

That's somebody else's problem.
I think we should note these prices are not

No, they were for

9/23/86

MR. ANGELL.
MS.

It must have been per

SEGER.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Anybody else want to say anything?

MR. JOHNSON.
I guess I should put in my two cents worth.
I
really don't have much to add; I think everybody has covered most of
the basics.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

From every point of view.

MR. JOHNSON. That is right. My own views are not that much
different from the staff's, either.
I am a little more pessimistic on
the trade side.
And looking a little further down the road in 1987, I
worry about how this automobile situation is finally going to work
itself out.
They are making a big contribution in sales this quarter,
which is going to drain inventory and have a fairly neutral effect on
GNP.
Even in the fourth quarter, it appears that their inventories
are going to build back up because the incentive programs will go off
and demand will slide. What comes after that is somewhat of a
concern. Are they going to cut prices, which doesn't appear to be the
case, or are they going to build in deeper incentive programs?
How
much have they borrowed from the future? My concern is that there may
be some bigger production cutbacks ahead in autos, perhaps in the 1987
period. The numbers are working out about right for 1986, it appears.
The third-quarter trade just doesn't look like it is going to
meet our expectations, at least if the July numbers are half correct.
I realize there is a gold sale phenomenon in the accounts but that
does not make me feel that comfortable. So I am a little more
pessimistic, but I do see a turnaround.
I don't think you can have a
depreciation of the dollar of around 40 percent against the major
industrial countries' currencies and not see some improvement.
I
think that we are getting close to the peak of the trade deficit and
that some improvement will start showing up.
If it just stopped
increasing, we could see a good improvement in the GNP growth rate.
I
am a little concerned, too, as I have mentioned before, about some of
the changed environment in the financial sector. I do think a lot of
it is associated with the turmoil over who is going to contribute to
world growth.
There has been a good bit of expectation developing
about interest rate reductions in Europe and Japan, which haven't
materialized. That has added to the argument of some policy makers in
the United States that the only way to solve the trade deficit, as a
result of this resistance, is through an ever lower dollar.
Obviously, that is going to create some anticipation in the financial
markets that trying to solve the trade deficit through a substantially
weaker dollar ultimately could be inflationary. I think that is a
factor contributing to the turmoil of financial markets. Hopefully,
if growth is stronger in Europe than we are thinking that will improve
the situation and calm the environment a bit and exports will pick up.
I think that is the only thing that ultimately is going to calm that
environment.
The outlook doesn't look that good in Japan; I think we
have to place most of our hopes on Europe and hope that Germany is
right unless they are planning to reduce their interest rates a little
later. Maybe this European exercise to support the dollar will help
but I am still concerned about the mechanics of that and how that's
all going to work out.
That is my two cents.

9/23/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KOHN.

Mr. Kohn.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr.

Chairman.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Let's break for donuts.
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. When I look at this economic forecast of
the staff, I don't know how good it is as a forecast, but it looks to
me in a less than perfect world to be about as good an outcome as one
could wish for.
It has a nice tapering off of domestic demand, a good
boost from the export side, real progress toward our longer-range
objectives and we escape without too much inflationary pressure. So,
if we can achieve that result we would be fine.
Now, the question is:
How do we achieve that result?
I will just make a forecast that we
are not going to have very startling policy moves arising out of this
meeting, so I would be glad to hear about your nuances.
You can prove
me all wrong. Who would like to comment?
Mr. Morris.
MR. MORRIS. Well, I have a little nuance, Mr. Chairman. I
agree with you that we are sort of locked into a no-change situation
here at the moment, but I am concerned about the increase in liquidity
that we are building into the system here.
If you look at the
security holdings of the commercial banks over the past four months,
they have risen by $31 billion of which $21 billion is in government
securities.
So, with loan demand so weak, we actually are pumping in
reserves and the banks are placing them in fairly liquid form.
It
seems to me that if we ever do get the economy reaccelerating that we
are going to have to lean against this liquidity growth at a fairly
early stage.
At the moment I would support alternative B.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That doesn't sound too nuanced.

Mr.

Melzer.
MR. MELZER. I also would favor alternative B.
Policy has
been moving in one direction for some period of time and I don't think
it's appropriate to turn it around on a dime.
I have some concerns,
as you know, about some of the developments on the inflation and
inflationary expectations front.
Looking down the road, I think we
have to be mindful of the fact that the operating regime that we are
pursuing now provides the reserves that are demanded, so pressures
aren't really going to show up in the funds rate.
After things have
had time to settle out--and I guess by that I mean the effects of the
decline in interest rates and so forth, all things being equal in
terms of the economy--if we don't begin to see some of the slowing in
the aggregates that Don has referred to, then I think we have to be
prepared to move to a firmer stance. As I say, the pressures are not
going to show up in the funds rate, and I think we cannot continue to
provide reserves at the rate we have been under the circumstances I
just brought up.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. Alternative B would be my choice. We have been
expecting the fundamentals to produce a pickup in economic activity,
and it appears from the recent data that that is occurring. At the

-32-

9/23/86

same time, I think financial markets are concerned about inflation and
the effects of a particularly easier policy on long-term rates and the
I share Tom's
value of the dollar would be adverse at this point.
If I had to
concern about overshooting our targets for M2 and M3.
introduce a nuance, it would be at least in terms of verbiage leaning
slightly toward greater restrictiveness.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I would first like to endorse your
statement that this would be a pretty darn favorable outlook. In
particular, considering that this is the fifth year of an economic
upswing I don't think we would have expected to have done any better
than that. As I indicated earlier, I think the biggest risk is the
possibility that this present pessimism that we have in the bond
markets will gain momentum, with long-term interest rates backing up
further. Obviously, that would not be a very healthy development from
the standpoint of the domestic outlook. I think a lot of the concern
in the market is stemming from some reduced hope that the Gramm-Rudman
procedures and the reduction in the deficit will be possible. There
is certainly nothing we can do about that from the standpoint of
monetary policy, but I think some of these developments clearly stem
from a change in attitudes and a feeling that there has been an
increase in the possibility of inflation. I think that stems, in
turn, from at least two factors. One is the recent action of OPEC;
but I think it is also probably nourished by some growing uneasiness
about the substantial growth in money and liquidity that we have
provided recently from the highly publicized moves of the System
toward greater accommodation. So, I think this is a time when we
really ought to pause and take stock and convey a posture of caution
to both financial markets and to the public in general, and I would
favor alternative B.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. I, too, favor alternative B. Like several
others, I must say I am troubled by what has happened in the bond
market in recent weeks. It seems to me that, for whatever reasons,
there has been some deterioration in inflationary expectations, as Mr.
Melzer and others have suggested. Beyond alternative B, and maybe by
way of a nuance, I think we need to find some way to signal more
clearly to the markets that we have a mechanism in place that will
enable us to respond, should that become necessary, with a somewhat
more restrictive policy. I think we will need some accompanying
language in the directive to make that clear. It seems to me that
such a stance would help to assure market participants and perhaps
would be positive in terms of its ultimate impact on long-term
interest rates; it also would be desirable from the perspective of the
way fiscal policy is turning out. I must say that that situation
looks worse than even I thought it would be, and I have been
pessimistic all along. So, I would say that while alternative B is a
fine starting point, we need to think a little more about the process
by which we respond to the behavior of M2 and M3 in this.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I can just interrupt a second: There
has been a lot of talk about the fiscal situation. I don't know
what's optimistic and what's pessimistic. I think it's Mickey Mouse
what they are going through to get $154 billion; it isn't realistic.

-33-

9/23/86

But I guess I would just as soon that they didn't get to $154 billion
If you believe the staff
from $220 billion all in one fell swoop.
forecast, which is what?--$225 billion to $177 billion--that doesn't
It's not quite $50
sound too bad to me as a change from a year ago.
billion less but $40 billion or so anyway.
MR. JOHNSON.

$230 billion is about the forecast.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Oh, I thought the forecast was about $225
billion--whatever. That may be about as much as it should be in one
year in my view, if you really believe that number. Now, I don't know
how solid that number is; I would guess it may be higher than that, I
suppose. However, what do you allow for in the farm program?
MR. KICHLINE. It was $32 billion last year and we have $26
or $27 billion in fiscal 1987; the Administration has something like
$18 billion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, good luck.

MR. JOHNSON. That's a good point. The smoke and mirrors
that they are going through right now likely will add to that $50
billion and-If you believe the $50 billion, I don't
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
think it's all that bad. But I don't fully believe the $50 billion.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as a lot of the markets are
concerned the smoke and mirrors, to use Governor Johnson's term, just
reinforce the out-year problem. I think that's what nagging at-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Some day they may have to think about even
increasing taxes; maybe that's what you go through to prove you can't
I don't want to get off on this subject. Mr.
reduce expenditures.
Forrestal.
MR. FORRESTAL. I, too, would support alternative B, Mr.
I think we are at a point in
Chairman, without any nuance at all.
time where we need to pause in monetary policy. As we pointed out,
the numbers coming in are not all that bad; the forecast is a
reasonably good one. And, while I don't think that markets are
infallible, I think that we do have to pay some attention to what has
been going on in the markets recently. To ignore the steepening of
the yield curve would be perilous for us, but I think we need to stop
and assess the situation for another three or four weeks and let
previous actions work their way through and hope that we get the kind
of improvement that we want.
One of the things that may be bothering
the markets as much as inflationary expectations is their feeling that
we have not only abandoned Ml but that perhaps we are in the process
of setting aside monetary targeting all together.
I think the markets
are asking what kind of an intermediate target we have, and I think
I don't
that is something we will perhaps have to take into account.
have any answers, certainly, at this point, but I think this kind of
pause is desirable. So, I would favor alternative B with borrowing at
around the level of $300 million.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

9/23/86

-34-

But
I am for alternative B without any nuances.
MR. BOEHNE.
that is against the background that we have been on a one-way street
toward ease.
We have pumped in a huge amount of liquidity by these
various measures that we look at in terms of the Ms and reserves and
credit--although some of those can be "funny" numbers.
But the
conclusion is that we have put in a lot.
We can analyze what the
market is telling us, but I think they know that it's a lot easier for
a central bank to ease than to tighten, and they may be beginning to
wonder how much we are going to overshoot and whether we will have the
kind of backbone, when the time comes, to show that we can operate
I think for now we should stay
monetary policy on a two-way street.
where we are but we ought to begin to think about what might happen to
all of this liquidity and how we might deal with it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.
I would join those in favor of alternative B
It seems to me that there are
without a tilt one way or another.
conflicting trends regarding the strength of the economic outlook and
To a
conflicting trends with regard to the inflationary situation.
large extent we have done our thing over the last few months.
Perhaps
Clearly, the markets are beginning to resist these changes.
the decision the next time is going to be harder than it is this time;
but for now I would simply stand back and see how events develop.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs.

Horn.

As we have been easing
I am for alternative B.
MS. HORN.
policy over time, with each subsequent move we have increasingly asked
ourselves the question: Can monetary policy really help the situation
For the last couple of moves, which I
of the imbalances and so forth?
have been in favor of, I have found it harder to answer the question
I think we probably have gone about
that monetary policy will help.
as far we can with monetary policy and now it is time to stop and
watch the developments.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS.

HORN.

No nuances.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.
MS.

SEGER.

Governor Angell.

Alternative B.
Alternative B straight.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

With no nuances?

I will

Governor Rice.
join the landslide.

Alternative B,

no

nuances.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOYKIN.

Mr. Boykin.

My view is the same,

"B."

MR. JOHNSON.
I am in favor of alternative B.
I'm torn about
nuances.
I wouldn't mind having some language describing why we are
pausing and seeking no change--language that would be associated with

9/23/86

the yield curve and with commodities and the dollar to at least
Somebody else
provide some sort of criteria for a guideline.
mentioned the fact that one problem is that people are starting to
They don't
wonder in the financial markets what the guideposts are.
think that we are paying that much attention to the aggregates, which
we are not, and I think we ought at least to tell them what is
I don't know quite how to engineer
important to us to some extent.

that language, but I think it would be useful.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. Well, having heard people, I have come to the
conclusion that alternative C is what we are after.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. WALLICH.

You want

to tighten up a little?

If you have to do something, you do

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

something.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.
I will join those who prefer "B" notwithstanding
some of the comments I made earlier in the discussion with respect to
M2 and M3 and the concern that we should be expressing to the market,
either verbally or otherwise, that we are not abandoning the
I share some of those feelings, but if we are going to
aggregates.
rock along at 2-1/2 or 3 percent growth, I would hate to be focusing
on M2 and M3 going marginally above the top of their range and take
So, I conclude that "B" is the appropriate
some action to tighten up.
course now and I would not be very receptive to any movement in the
period ahead if M2 and M3 are going to exceed their targets in just a
marginal way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr.

Corrigan.

I will go for "B" but I have a
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
nuance.
It's a little more than a nuance.
I think at this juncture
that we have to be prepared to pave the way for the possibility that
we might have to tighten.
Paving the way doesn't mean that we have to
go down that road; but to be positioned to do that if the need arises
So, I would lean a little in that direction.
strikes me as important.
The question of what we would do over the balance of the year if M2
and M3 burst out on the upside of those ranges is a question that has
to be faced.
We don't have to face it decisively right now, but I
I, for one, think
think we have to have that possibility in mind.
that we'll be faced with that situation; we are not going to be able

to sweep it under the rug.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't know what all that means

[for

policy].
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. It means "B" with a little bias in
the direction of snugger rather than easier.
MR. BLACK.

It probably means more emphasis on "woulds" than

"mights."

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

More emphasis on what?

-36-

9/23/86

MR. BLACK.

On "woulds" than "mights."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. HELLER.

Mr. Heller.

Alternative B without comment or reservations.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I better read what alternative B says.
Well, something like $300 borrowing is fine and I don't have any
The question is what happens if, let's
problems with alternative B.
say, the business situation goes along pretty much as expected but the
monetary numbers continue to run high or the dollar is weak, and
To use a word I picked up from Mr.
[unintelligible] are weak.
Sprinkel in a different context when he made a comment about the
business outlook gathering strength--that's not what I am referring
The
to--we do expect that the inflation rate is going to "ooze up."
question that I raise is: Under what conditions should borrowings ooze
up?
MS.

SEGER.

Hasn't he been expecting that

for three years,

though?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think it's

[unintelligible]

the

oozing

up word.
MR. BLACK. What kind of increments are we going to use to
measure ooze, Mr. Chairman--$50 million, $25 million?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Well, we have the current problem that the
borrowings are so low that every time something unusual happens they
The first question is whether we are bothered by that;
get higher.
I'm not.
If somebody's computer goes out or they get caught late in
Leaning over
the day by some withdrawals or something what do we do?
backwards to try to offset that seems not to be the order of the day.
We haven't been doing that and I would think that we don't want to do
that.
We don't do anything at the moment but the question is beyond
If, for
that.
A number of people raised the issue of liquidity.
instance, the aggregates continue to run pretty high--higher than what
alternative B straightforwardly suggests--and the business news
continues reasonably on the firm side and let's say, just to put
another thing in, that the dollar doesn't look all that great, should
we ooze up on the borrowings more or less deliberately?
I interpret
what some people said as certainly in that direction, but I am not
I
Many people just said they were neutral.
sure about the others.
don't know what they meant by neutral.
That's what a straightforward
interpretation of the directive permits.
MR. JOHNSON. My interpretation is not so much that I think
how much attention we pay to the aggregates still depends on what
velocity is doing; it's whether the economy seems to be catching on in
the face of growth in the aggregates.
I am not that troubled by the
If we have another huge negative
aggregates performing strongly.
velocity number, I think the third quarter is going to come in about
like the second quarter.
Given evidence of that, if commodity prices
kept rising and the yield curve kept steepening and the dollar was
still under pressure, that would be criteria for oozing up the
borrowings a little in my opinion.

9/23/86

I don't know
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it would in mine, too.
whether I would necessarily expect the yield curve to continue to
But a sense of inflationary expectations
rise; it might or might not.
In those conditions, with the
would be a factor, however measured.
aggregates running high, I would ooze a bit.
MR. JOHNSON. Are you suggesting that we have a $300 million
Are you saying that we work
target that we just [unintelligible]?
harder not to offset these other leakages?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I wouldn't offset those right now.
I figure actually changing [borrowings] a little, not very much.
Oozing is meant to convey that you lean with a slight drift, which
wouldn't carry borrowings above $400 million, I don't think. But you
might ooze by less than that.
MR. JOHNSON.
the borrowings.

So you're just saying leave some discretion on

I see it
Yes, and mostly on that side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
less likely, given where borrowings are now, that we would want to
ooze on the down side.
MR. ANGELL.
I certainly believe if commodity prices were to
make a move upward by a significant amount, [precipitated] by some
unforeseen event, that it would require us to look more carefully at
the monetary aggregates and to tighten slightly; and I would take the
borrowing up to $400 million. I don't know how likely it is that that
event is going to occur, but I think it would be appropriate for us to
have an understanding that a move would take place if it needs to.
MR. JOHNSON.
alternative C.

Well, what is

"C"?

I don't want to ooze into

MR. MORRIS. One way of doing it, Mr. Chairman, using last
month's directive, is to change "somewhat greater or lesser reserve
restraint" simply to "somewhat greater reserve restraint," indicating
a bias.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That's the kind of thing we could do.

MR. ANGELL.
I am not sure that we want to have greater
I don't want greater reserve restraint right now.
reserve restraint.
I would only want it under certain spelled-out conditions.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, spell out all the conditions in great
detail.
If we can get a sense of that and then do it--.
I am
assuming there is no change now from what we have been doing, right at
the moment.
MR. MORRIS.

We would have but one direction of ooze.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could have another direction of ooze if
If the economy was clearly weak, the dollar was
something went wrong.
clearly strong, and the aggregates were behaving just fine, we would
move in the other direction.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

The

anatomy of an ooze.

9/23/86

MR. BLACK. But you wouldn't go as far as "C" because that
would be a trickle instead of an ooze.
MR. ANGELL.

The markets would interpret that as more than a

SPEAKER(?).

If the yield curve steepened, policy would be

trickle--

tighter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You may get some argument about that.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
[It could]
[Unintelligible] what we care about.

go the other way first.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I am not talking about anything that will
be a very overt move. Anything we are talking about is within the
range of natural fluctuation anyway, but it's a little sense of where
we are aiming over time and in certain contingencies.
Why don't we
just look at the wording and that will resolve the problem: "Maintain
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions.
This action is
expected to be consistent with growth in M2--"
What numbers do we
have here?
MR. ANGELL.

We had 7 to 9 percent the last time.

MR. GUFFEY.

That's still okay.

MR. ANGELL.

I would think so.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Is 7 percent too low or not as an

estimate?
MR. ANGELL.

I think 7 to 9 percent is fine.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the midpoint is 8 percent; 7 to 9
percent encompasses the midpoint. We won't say "respectively;" we
just say-MR. ANGELL.

Yes,

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
7 to 9 percent.

it refers to M2 and M3.
It refers to both at annual rates of about

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

9 percent is above--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, 7 percent is below. What the staff
says is 8, 8-1/2 percent; that's roughly in the middle of 7 to 9
percent. We have this great choice of whether we say "about 8
percent" or "7 to 9 percent."
The "7 to 9 percent" doesn't bother me
given the behavior of these things anyway.
MR. PARRY.
Isn't this the same discussion as last time?
think it was 7 to 9 percent, the same numbers.

I

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What we did was encompass different
numbers for the two.
I don't care: either 7 to 9 percent or about 8
percent.

9/23/86

MR. ANGELL.

7 to

9.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I detect no realistic difference between
"about 8" and "7 to 9."
This says "about 7 to 9" and maybe that is a
difference.
We have a nuance of difference.
MR. JOHNSON.

"About" goes with 8 and not with 7 to

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do we always say "about"

9.

even when we use

a range?

be more

MR. ANGELL.
You could take the "about" out, if you want to
specific.
We put "about" in there for fuzziness at one time.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I don't think this is decisive, but
if you say 7 to 9 percent for the balance of the year, you are saying
that you are prepared to tolerate growth outside the boundaries for
the year for both M2 and M3, though not by a lot.
If we had 9 percent
growth in M2 and M3 for this period, we would end up about where "A"
is, and on the charts "A" is outside the cone.
It's a trivial amount.
MR. ANGELL.
If we are looking here at
9 percent you are going to stay on there.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

"B" would stay
But

the

9 percent, with about

right on the cone.

9 percent

stays on the cone.

MR. JOHNSON.
That's what I am saying, 9 percent would be
"B."
It would be moving right along that cone line, since we are
right on it now.
MR. ANGELL.

That's

right.

And M2

is slightly under it.

MR. KOHN.
It doesn't quite work that way because of the
compounding problems that-MR. JOHNSON.

I guess you are

right.

MR. KOHN.
In other words, you need a slightly lower growth
rate--like the 8 or the 8-1/2 percent--to keep you moving along 9
percent from last November's base.
Of course, you are talking about
tenths of a point here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[unintelligible].

I don't understand how these lines

MR. JOHNSON.
I assume that we are on the line and if we're
on the line and the line says 9 percent-MR. PRELL.
It's more on a linear scale than a log scale.
wouldn't be much if you did it on a log scale.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

MR. MORRIS.

That's because it's not

The deviation is trivial.

logarithmic.

It

-40-

9/23/86

This is splitting hairs over something that we

MR. ANGELL.
know nothing about.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right. I think it's either "about
Who
8 percent" or "7 to 9 percent." What are the preferences?
prefers 7 to 9 percent? I count 9. I guess we have a majority for 7
to 9 percent. I am a little embarrassed by continuing this sentence
on M1 about this great expectation that doesn't materialize.
MR. RICE.

Sooner or later we will be right.

In
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know what we can do with it.
the interest of variety we might express the same sentiment, but do we
have to express it in exactly the same words?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes, let's stay with it until we--

SPEAKER(?).

We can put it lower in the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All right, we'll leave it the same, as
embarrassing as it is. Now we get to the nuances. Let me-MR. JOHNSON.
ooze in that way.

That one still leaves the door open.

We can

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No we can't. No, I wouldn't want to ooze
If we wanted to make it a little more explicit I
in this language.
guess we could say something like "slightly greater" instead of
"somewhat greater." We could say: "Slightly greater reserve restraint
would be acceptable should the aggregates exceed expectations
depending upon the strength of the business expansion, developments in
foreign" etc., and "somewhat lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable" and so forth and so on.
MR. MORRIS.

I think we need an asymmetrical statement this

time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the "would"-MR. JOHNSON.

I made it non-symmetrical just by changing

Changing the "would" and putting "might."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have done that lots of times. We can
do it all in one sentence which is what we have often done. But if we
want to put a little more emphasis on the aggregates, we could just
say "somewhat greater reserve restraint would and somewhat lesser
reserve restraint might be acceptable depending upon" just what you
have here.
MR. JOHNSON.

Split the two out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But that would put them both in the same
sentence. I tried to make a little distinction that the aggregates
would trigger this depending upon the other things. We could still
say "depending on the behavior of the aggregates, taking account of
the strength of the business expansion" and so forth. That's our
rather traditional way of doing it.

-41-

9/23/86

MR. ANGELL.
commodity markets.

I would suggest we add international credit and

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't want to get too many things in

there.
MR. HELLER. What would we really do differently if
international credit markets would change unless it's [unintelligible]
to the exchange rate?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think international credit markets is
meant to be a code word for-MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

If the Germans lowered their interest rate-Or the dollar depreciates.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought it was, frankly, a reference to
the international debt situation. Let's change "somewhat" to
"slightly" and say "somewhat greater reserve restraint would be
acceptable or slightly lesser reserve restraint might"--.
I guess
"slightly" should go after the would, too: "slightly greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be
acceptable depending upon the behavior of the aggregates and taking
account of..."
MR. MELZER.

"Taking account of" probably does it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Your way without the "and"; comma, "taking
Is that all right?
into account the behavior of the aggregates," etc.
MR. MORRIS.
I question, Mr. Chairman, how many people would
really want to support the condition of lesser reserve restraint.
I
don't know; conceivably there could be conditions that would
generate-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me ask the question this way.
I
will give you the most extreme test of that.
This doesn't rest on
anything very dramatic in the economy.
In this period of a few weeks,
suppose the Germans and Japanese say: We will reduce our interest
rates, but you have to reduce your discount rate again to help us
along. Think of it as good politically, or for some reason or other.
I don't think they will say that, but suppose they do.
MR. ANGELL.
Suppose the Japanese stock market went down
dramatically and suppose oil prices started heading lower dramatically
and we got some other kind of movements there and a pessimism
prevails--if M2 was growing at 5-1/2 percent and M1 was at 6 percent,
I think you might want to have lesser restraint.
MR. MORRIS.
I would rather leave it out now and have the
Chairman call a telephone conference.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can make extreme assumptions about the
business situation which are not inconceivable, but which I don't
think are very likely during this particular period.
I think it's
more likely that the question I raised could arise, but I don't

9/23/86

consider that very likely--don't misunderstand me.
occur?

But suppose it did

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. On the merits, the best outcome
would be that they lowered their rates and we didn't.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I have to question their

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
that's for darn sure.

[unintelligible].

That would be where I would start;

MR. JOHNSON.
I don't think it's likely that we would need to
It just doesn't look like that
use the alternative for ease.
alternative is going to materialize. But I certainly wouldn't want to
leave it out as a possibility; you never know. The "might" and
"would" nuance deals with it okay; I wouldn't want to just leave it
out completely.
MR. ANGELL.
I don't think there is any reason to make it
appear in the minutes [for this meeting] that we know what's going to
I think we ought to leave it balanced, but
happen in this atmosphere.
we can imagine in our minds what is likely on either of these or what
might be.
MR. RICE.

I think we balanced it just right.

MS. SEGER. Wasn't it back in May that we put in the
asymmetrical language?
And when those minutes were reported some
people in the media were saying that we almost tightened and they made
a big thing of that.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I don't mind giving signs that we didn't
like what we saw in the financial markets.
I would like people to be
able to look back and see that in the discussion.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, does Mr. Morris have any following
for leaving [the easing alternative] out entirely?
MR. MELZER.

I would support that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You have a following but not
I think we appear to be for an asymmetrical nuance.

[a majority].

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I would like to raise a question
on the other side--that is, with regard to the language of 7 to 9
percent on M2 and M3 and the importance of that language with regard
to snugging up a bit or oozing up a bit.
We are at the top of those
ranges now and I guess I have an operational question as to how either
you or the Desk would respond. What would you do if M2 and M3 started
coming in at 9-1/2 or 10 percent and the economy was working along
Unless you saw some
Would you then ooze up?
without much problem?
real strength in the economy, I would hope you wouldn't ooze up until
M2 and M3 burst out as Jerry Corrigan described it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think I just gave you my interpretation.
We are not talking about a great [unintelligible]; we are not talking
We are talking about some sense that it
about one week or two weeks.
is indeed running high and that if other things were proceeding as

9/23/86

expected--if we didn't get any weakening in the economy, didn't get
any strengthening really in the exchange rate, the oil price was not
But it's only an ooze.
going down another $3--yes, we would ooze.
It's not triggered off 9 percent; it's something
MR. GUFFEY.
higher than 9 percent.
I think it can go higher than 9 percent by
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
But
some figure in one week or, necessarily, by one month's figure.
if it was one month, the fact that it was continuing--as best we can
make these appraisals--and there weren't any signs of tapering off,
But it's only an ooze and, given all those other
yes, we would ooze.
Do we have enough understanding
things, it's not much of a quibble.
It's: maintain; 7 to 9
of what we are talking about to vote on this?
percent; slightly greater reserve restraint would and slightly lesser
reserve restraint might be acceptable depending on the behavior of the
aggregates, taking into account all these things; and 4 to 8 percent.
MR. BERNARD.
Yes
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Yes
Yes
Governor Angell
President Guffey
Yes
Governor Heller
Yes
President Horn
Yes
Governor Johnson
Yes
President Melzer
Yes
President Morris
Yes
Yes
Governor Rice
Yes
Governor Seger
I have
I'd be against it.
Governor Wallich
this view of what we can do but it shouldn't be in this context.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
guess we are finished.

Okay, you want to tighten a little.

END OF MEETING

I

