Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
November 5, 1986

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Wednesday, November 5, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman 1/
Mr. Angell
Mr. Guffey
Mr. Heller
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Melzer
Mr. Morris
Mr. Rice
Ms. Seger
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,
Kohn, Ms. Munnell, Messrs. Prell and Siegman,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

1/

Entered the meeting after action to approve minutes for meeting
of September 23, 1986.

11/5/86
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director for
Monetary and Financial Policy, Board of Governors
Messrs. Simpson and Slifman, Deputy Associate Directors,
Division of Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Broaddus, Rolnick, Rosenblum, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, Minneapolis, Dallas, and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. Beebe and Ms. Clarkin, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of San Francisco and New York, respectively
Ms. Gonczy, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago
Mr. Meyer, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
November 5, 1986
And I might say that
[Statement--see Appendix.]
MR. CROSS.
this morning, following the elections, it had been expected that a
Democratic victory would lead to some weakness in the dollar.
There
was a very temporary decline in the Far East with the dollar moving
down from 2.06 to 2.04 [against the mark] and comparably against the
yen. But that lasted only a few hours and in the evening before Tokyo
was closing the dollar was beginning to move back up.
Subsequently,
in European markets, it has moved back to about 2.06-3/4.
So it is
now at a higher level than it was yesterday.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
swap extensions?

Are there any questions or comments on the

Is there any more to say about the so-called
MR. BOEHNE.
agreement between the Americans and the Japanese--particularly what it
might portend for the future?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, what it may portend for the future
is anybody's guess.
I don't know anything more about it.
Mr. Baker
has been looking for some reason to say something nice. And he had it
with the discount rate reduction and this report that the Japanese
might reduce taxes sometime in the future. But they said it hasn't
got any operational significance in terms of intervention in any
direct sense.
I think it is quite consistent with intervening if
things perhaps became extreme in either direction, but it is no
commitment to undertake anything.
MR. BOEHNE.
been and--

The view on Germany is essentially as it has

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Germany?
I think the situation is quite
different in Germany in the very short run. They have been growing
pretty fast.
I saw Mr. Poehl earlier this week and he's still armed
You can argue that 3 percent is
with all these numbers, which I--.
too modest an objective for Germany. But they can make pretty good
progress if they are growing at 3 percent--which in their view is good
enough--with 5 to 6 percent domestic demand and a minus on the
external side, which of course is what people want. And right now
they can show it at least for two quarters. Their monetary growth is
still exceeding their targets by a significant amount, which doesn't
make them very happy. They are sitting there worried about how they
are going to explain this.
They have to announce new targets in
December and they say: Do we rebase or do we [unintelligible]?
It's
the same type of problem that we have.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
of advice on that subject.

You're in a position to give a lot

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I did. His charts for the first time--he
showed me charts [unintelligible] just like the ones that we have, but
for two years [changing] the base. One chart has a very expanded
scale on the vertical axis, just the way some of ours do.
The chart
looks at the last two years and it has these little wedges on it and
it shows the actual movement in the monetary base. And the actual
movement for two years in a row now is way above the wedges. While

11/5/86

they've been closer than we have, their scale was so expanded that it
looked pretty bad.
It was just like the kind of thing that you-MR. MORRIS.
percent in Germany--

Well, they have real wages growing at about 5

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They did this year.

MR. MORRIS.
--at a time when the unemployment rate is almost
9 percent.
I would think that if we had that situation we might be a
little nervous about expanding too much as well.
MR. TRUMAN. But the wages were really set, basically, before
the prices went down. And so real wages on this [unintelligible]
economy. That's one of the questions: whether or how long this
recovery is going to be sustained. The basic wage bargains were set
before they had experienced the effects of lower oil prices and
[unintelligible] and the exchange rate change and prices came down.
MR. MORRIS.
That's true.
But they still settled for the 5
percent wage increase at a time when the unemployment rate was very
high.
I should think that-MR. TRUMAN. Some of that was deliberate, too.
fact, the government was talking of wages as a way to--

Last fall, in

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Their GNP deflator--that's domestic
prices--is running at about a 3 percent annual rate of increase.
It's
like ours running higher than the CPI; there is an even sharper
There is concern over what might
discrepancy than in this country.
I guess their Economic Institute's
happen as they get into next year.
A 3 percent growth next
projection has raised some question about it.
year--which is what they're projecting--depending upon what happened
last quarter and what happens this quarter does not imply a 3 percent
rate of growth from fourth quarter to fourth quarter next year but
significantly less than that.
MR. HELLER. But the labor markets in Germany are very tight
Openings
They just can't hire anybody.
right now in skilled workers.
are-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But their unemployment is in the north.
That's what they keep saying, it's a regional-MR. HELLER.

Also a sectoral unemployment.

MR. MORRIS.

So they're like the British in that sense.

MR. HELLER. And because they have the enormous terms of
trade gains in the external sector they [can] pay the high wage this
year without hurting themselves domestically in making it show on the
inflation front. But I think the difficult situation will be next
year when the terms of trade don't improve any more and people have
become accustomed to big wage increases.
MR. MORRIS.

Exactly.

11/5/86

MR. HELLER. But if the weakness should show through, I think
they're fully prepared to move forward to 1987 the tax cuts that they
are now scheduling for 1988--although those deadlines are passing very
rapidly right now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
election and part of the-MR. HELLER.

Well, they won't do anything before the

Not before the election, but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Part of the problem is that the opposition
party adopts an American view to economic policy, or vice-versa, which
is very embarrassing to the government.
So if they did anything they
would appear to be adopting the opposition's economic view; and for
understandable reasons they don't want to do that. Actually, the
Bundesbank wants to take some technical actions that appear as
They
tightening and wouldn't really be--I don't understand it all.
want to get rid of rediscount quotas, which they think are getting out
of line, and substitute some other way of putting the money in the
market. But I'm afraid if they do that it will be interpreted as a
tightening.
MS. SEGER. Is it true that they were willing to cut their
discount rate in August but the word got out so they were upset?
There was a little article in today's paper to that effect.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, the words I've heard are literally that
there was more pressure at one point to raise the discount rate
because of the growth of the aggregates.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I think that was probably a little later.
My impression is that earlier [Mr. Poehl] maneuvered so as to be
potentially in a position to reduce the discount rate in early
September, say, which is what he was talking about.
But then the
aggregates got high and there was all the public discussion and so
forth, and the GNP numbers came in as strong as they expected. All
those things together made a discount rate cut less likely rather than
more likely as September actually arrived.
MR. FORRESTAL. Can you give us any more information about
the Mexican situation?
Specifically, is it in difficulty or-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's hard to tell.
It's a big
subject. Why don't we have a discussion about Mexico after the
meeting? Are there any other questions about the market? We do have
this question of routinely extending the swap lines.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS. SEGER.

I would move it.

I second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any discussion of that?
If not, you are
authorized to routinely roll over swap lines, Mr. Cross.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

Mr. Sternlight.
[Statement--see Appendix.]

11/5/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Questions or comments?

MR. MELZER. Peter, do you have any thoughts on the decline
in the demand for excess reserves?
MR. STERNLIGHT. We were steadily moving up our allowance for
excess reserves. We had moved the standard allowance up to $900
Since about March or
million in the first few months of this year.
April we have tended to fall a trifle shy of that $900 million level.
And now we think that maybe the demand was augmented somewhat in the
So, I'm not
early months of this year by some seasonal factors.
I
convinced of any basic decline in the demand for excess reserves.
think it has probably leveled off and what we are seeing now is just a
little resistance for seasonal reasons. We will have to be watching
carefully as we get toward the winter months again to see whether we
need to review that and go back to something like the $900 million
level.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other observations, we
have to ratify the transactions.
MR. MORRIS.
MR. JOHNSON.

So moved.
I second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
the economic outlook.

Any objections?

MR. PRELL. He will attempt to.
[Statement--see Appendix.]

Mr. Prell will clarify

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

MR. BOEHNE.
I wonder if you could elaborate further on your
discussion concerning the recent increase in import prices--but in
terms of how you see that improving our trade balance and how you see
it impacting the domestic price level.
MS. HORN. I would like to piggy-back on that and ask: How do
they come through in the CPI?
Do you have an estimate or rule of
thumb that you use about what proportion of the CPI is import prices
and so on?
MR. PRELL. Well, let me just say a couple of words, and I
know Ted Truman will want to address the broader issue. The more
interesting recent data on import prices were the BLS figures that
were released just last week. They showed a substantial increase in
the prices of a number of commodity groups--something on the order of
a 12 or 13 percent annual rate of increase. On the consumer price
side, it's very hard to trace these changes in import prices through
It's apparent that some of
to what is happening at the retail level.
those groups that would seem to have relatively large import
components, say, apparel and automobiles, are showing relative
But it's very hard to
strength in terms of consumer price movements.
pin this down. Let me let Ted say something about the broader
analytical issue on the pass-through of that sort.
MR. TRUMAN. On the consumer price level there are three
channels: the direct impact from higher prices, the indirect effects
of competing goods, and then some allowance for aggregate demand

11/5/86

effects.
We used to say that the rule of thumb was that something
like a 10 percent decline in the dollar on the G-10 index would give
you, after three years, something like a 1-1/2 percent increase in the
level of the CPI.
But the work that we have looked at recently
suggests that it may be a little less than that--perhaps something in
the 1 to 1-1/2 percent range.
One of the reasons it is less relates
to the same phenomenon that we have debates about--what is the right
index?
The prices of some imports--especially to the extent that they
are imports from countries against which the dollar is not falling--

will not be rising as rapidly as the others. It is through that
differential effect, however, that you are essentially going to change
the distribution of trade. As far as the general question about
[prices] feeding through, ultimately you have to get some prices up in
order to get some consumers or importers to change the way they are
doing business. And in that sense there is both good news and bad
news in the price increases that now seem to be coming along. The
good news is certainly that the process that should lead the decisionmakers to look elsewhere--maybe at home--to satisfy their needs is
starting. So far there is certainly some evidence of slowing in the
rate of growth in the volume of imports. I might also add one small
footnote on the BIS figures that came out on Friday that Mike referred
to: the revisions show a higher increase in import prices than the
numbers that were incorporated in the GNP figures that were released
earlier in the month. That would suggest that for a given value of
imports you would get less quantity, ceteris paribus.
MR. HELLER. In the Greenbook data in that first table, I-7,
you have some amazingly good news that you didn't even refer to in the
oral presentation or the written material, and that is a 0.4 increase
in the GNP deflator for the fourth quarter of 1986--unless it's a
typo. Would you tell me about this?
MR. PRELL. It's 0.7. This is one of those quarters in which
the movements in imports and import prices do something very exotic to
GNP prices and, particularly, the deflator. As you can see, the third
quarter was 3.6 percent.
It was above the recent trend and [the
fourth-quarter number] is essentially offsetting that, given the
gyrations of imports and the effects of changes in the relative
importance of oil prices.
MR. HELLER.

But you just said you expect import prices to go

up and-MR. PRELL. All things equal, rising import prices drive down
GNP price measures in the short run because imports are subtracted.
That is one of the recurring novelties.
I think if you look at the
fixed weight measures we are getting some of this showing through.

MR. HELLER.
MR. PRELL.

Too-But it's smaller in effect there.

MR. PARRY. There are two effects.
weights and then the change in prices.

It's the change in

SPEAKER(?).
One question about the near term: I noticed that
you have a fair runoff in farm inventories and also an increase in
government.
Is that an offset?
Is there a CCC thing going on there?

11/5/86

MR. PRELL. Let me check. Yes. We have a $4-1/2 billion
increase in CCC inventories.
That's roughly the range we have been
seeing the last couple of quarters, so there is no gyration in that.
Basically, it's something that goes through from our overall output
estimates.
MR. PARRY. Well, that should show up in government spending
It didn't last quarter, I don't think. Government
at the same time.
spending last quarter actually declined very substantially. The rate
of growth in the fourth quarter was up, so maybe it just got swamped.
MR. PRELL. Defense spending in the third quarter was flat
and we have a noticeable uptick based on what we would perceive to be
the deliveries.
Obviously, there is some very erratic timing; some
procurement items show up or don't show up in any given time period.
MR. PARRY. Are there any indicators that support the slowing
in state and local spending to that extent?
MR. PRELL. We don't really have much to go on there. There
is some elusiveness in tracing the data that we do see to the BEA's
translation. We can track what is published for construction put-inplace in the state and local sector, but BEA does considerable
massaging of those data in estimating the structures component of
state and local expenditures. Basically, in terms of the overall
budgetary situation, we just don't see the likelihood that that kind
of growth can be sustained.
In fact, we have been averaging something
like a 45 percent annual rate of growth in state and local
construction over the past two quarters; it has really jumped up very
rapidly. So, we are looking for that to level off quite a bit.
MS. SEGER. Would you answer a couple of questions about the
distribution of activity in 1987?
Specifically, for producers durable
equipment you have a rather significant pickup between the increase in
first quarter of next year and the remaining portion of the year.
From your general comments I am trying to figure out why you would
have it picking up that much.
MR. PRELL. Well, we have [unintelligible] this tax effect
built in.
It's rather small but when you annualize these things they
begin to look bigger.
In effect, we have a small payback on the
equipment side in the first quarter of next year because we are
assuming that they will succeed in accelerating some of their
purchases into this quarter and thus capture the more liberal
depreciation allowances.
MS. SEGER. So you don't see a negative tax reform impact,
then, beyond the first quarter?
MR. PRELL. We perceive that there is some increase in the
cost of capital.
The tax law changes, if nothing else were changing
the outlook, would be tending to depress capital spending. But all the
other considerations--including the fact that, as we perceive it, real
interest rates have declined considerably over the past year or so and
there is a long lag in the effects of that on spending--are tending to
offset that change. Furthermore, we think that as output
[unintelligible] demand, firms--particularly in the manufacturing
sector--will be more inclined to move ahead toward modernization,

11/5/86

replacing their older equipment, and continuing their efforts to
reduce costs and increase productivity.
It's not really a very rapid
growth of investment spending, but we think there is a reasonable
foundation.
MS. SEGER.
can't quantify my--

I guess I am just more nervous about it, but I

MR. PRELL. We are still in a situation where it's hard to
assess the effects that have already occurred because of anticipations
or uncertainties relating to tax reform--whether some of the hit
already has been taken or whether people now will move ahead knowing
what the laws will be.
It is very hard to read the current situation.
MS. SEGER. Also, on residential structures, you have quite a
nice turnaround between the second and third quarters of next year and
then additional strength in the fourth quarter, if I am reading this
correctly.
MR. PRELL. These annualized growth rates for residential
investment tend to exaggerate, I think, the movements in housing
starts that are in the projection. But we have the single-family
sector improving a little as 1987 progresses.
MS. SEGER.

Is this an interest rate play or what?

MR. PRELL. Well, part of is, I think. But it's not really a
significant interest rate effect.
It's more a come-back in terms of
the underlying demographic factors.
And, as construction in the
multifamily area winds down and rents begin to show the effects in
that area, it's just going to tip the balance a bit further in favor
of single-family home ownership, which we think the demographic
factors already are going to be favoring. But we don't have a
tremendous change in the overall affordability of single-family homes.
MS. SEGER.

Yes,

I notice your housing starts are pretty

level.
MR. PRELL. On the single-family side, we move from around
1.15 in the third quarter up to just over 1.20 in the second half of
next year, so it's not really a dramatic change. The multifamily side
is continuing to trend downward through most of next year.
MS. SEGER. A final question on the domestic auto sales:
Apparently you assume that the so-called "give-back" will all be
accomplished in the fourth quarter of this year and then sales will be
sort of flat and unexciting quarter by quarter in 1987.
MR. PRELL.
I'm sure it won't turn out that way.
Short of
forecasting every twist and turn in marketing strategies, we have
sales coming back toward what we think will be a reasonable overall
pace for the year. But yes, [unintelligible] and is consistent with
the payback largely being through by the end of this month and things
beginning to turn up a bit--perhaps with some renewed incentives, if
necessary. But we don't at this point anticipate that there will be
gigantic incentive programs put in place in the near term.

11/5/86

MS. SEGER.
So, you are not assuming that GM has really been
gambling on this approach and that without these incentive programs
they will dramatically [cut back] their production schedules?
MR. PRELL. We see them trying to keep things on a stable
level, [given] the actions they took in October to cut back their
production schedules. The [unintelligible] of what we pick up
suggests that maybe they are going to move toward a somewhat more
realistic approach to their production, so we might see something that
is a little smoother, in fact, next year without them pushing so hard
to maintain what seems to be an unrealistic market share expectation.
MS. SEGER.

Thank you.

MR. MELZER. Mike, the trend in personal consumption
expenditures has been upward since the fourth quarter of last year.
You are really showing a dramatic shift in the fourth quarter, which I
guess is primarily autos.
MR. PRELL(?).

Yes.

MR. MELZER. Do you try to factor into that the effects of
the tax legislation and accelerated big ticket purchases to the extent
that you can?
MR. PRELL. Well, we have certainly attempted to do so.
Our
assessment is that there may be a very small effect. A number of
factors lead us to think that it will be small. One is that many
people may already have made the big move to buy an automobile before
year-end--in September when they could also get the big price cuts and
the rebates and the other financing arrangements. A second factor is
that, in most states, that sales tax deduction does not bulk very
large as a percentage of the price, even for automobiles. And what
one can bargain with a dealer for may be more important than that.
Many people [don't] itemize their deductions; furthermore, for goods
other than automobiles, people generally are going to be using tax
tables and this specific purchase doesn't become an important matter
in further deductions.
So, putting all of these things together,
we're looking for just a very small effect in the consumer sector.
MR. MELZER. A related question: What happened to real
disposable income in the third quarter?
MR. PRELL.
MR. MELZER.

It moved down.
I know.

MR. PRELL.
Three things seem to be the major factors there.
One is that farm subsidy payments were much smaller than they were in
the second quarter. Those have been a considerable short-run swing
factor this year.
The second factor is that consumer prices were up
in the third quarter because oil prices [were no longer] going down or
flat as in the first half of the year. The third factor, which is
also very important in these numbers but is rather obscure, is a
substantial increase in personal tax payments that wedges between
income and disposable income. We have tried hard to track this down
with parties elsewhere in the government, but it remains a somewhat
obscure area.
It is something that has been a factor in bouncing the

11/5/86

disposable income numbers around over the course of the year.
Basically though, we think that underneath all of this is a
deceleration in disposable income growth in large measure related to
the end of that oil price effect.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Would people like to comment on their own
views of the outlook?
Bob Parry.
MR. PARRY. I think there have been more signs of possible
strength in the economy since the last FOMC meeting than there have of
weakness.
The signals that we see coming from the Twelfth District,
on balance, are really rather positive. Total employment and
unemployment figures showed continued improvement in September and
they paint a better picture than that for the nation as a whole. As
an example, the District's unemployment rate fell in September, in
contrast to the nation's, to 6.8 percent; and we've seen employment
growth over the past year averaging just under 5 percent compared to
2.2 percent nationally. We also received data on trade from the
Pacific area customs districts for August and September and nongrain
agricultural exports, particularly cotton and also rice, seem to be
benefiting from the lower dollar and also from the effects of the 1985
farm bill. The lower dollar and Canadian strikes are also helping the
forest products industry. Aero-space and related electronics are a
source of considerable strength in many areas of the District and the
service industries are performing well.
At the national level, it would appear to me that the signs
are relatively strong--clearly not as strong as the western region,
but favorable. Recent monthly statistics that have been mentioned for
orders, for new home sales, and for leading indicators in merchandise
trade do indicate some strength. And I do believe, similar to the
Greenbook [forecast], that the third-quarter runoff of inventories
should lead to greater production in the current quarter. And it
would seem to me that based upon, admittedly, a very preliminary
reading of the third-quarter trade numbers that there is a chance of a
turnaround in net exports in the fourth quarter.
The monthly trade
numbers for August and September looked as though they had improved
somewhat and, at least in some of the deflators I've looked at, the
prices of durable imported goods are rising rapidly. So it appears as
though the prices of U.S. exports are becoming more competitive. In
summary, our forecast for growth in '87 is very close to that of the
Greenbook. We expect a pickup in inflation next year of relatively
modest proportions. The changes in our forecast since the last FOMC
meeting produced a little lower rate of inflation next year, so our
forecast suggests a better trade-off between growth and inflation than
we had before.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.
In our District the fundamental conditions are
very consistent with the pattern that we've had, really, all year
long. The unevenness that I've commented on before certainly
continues.
Those who are doing okay are really doing quite well, and
the weak parts of our District show no particular signs of
improvement.
I hate to bring the agricultural subject back up, but
there has been a renewed outbreak of gloom in that area for two very
different and diametrically opposed reasons.
First, the flood damage
in September was localized, particularly in the central Michigan area,

11/5/86

-10

but in the areas that were hardest hit the crops were virtually wiped
out.
That, of course, is an adverse condition that's completely
unrelated to the basic adjustments going on in agriculture.
The
opposite problem exists in the other parts of the District.
The
harvest is now largely completed and I am told that the production has
just been huge, phenomenal. While the acreage for total production
will be down, on a per acre basis the yields have been very, very
high.
That means, I think, that the carryover stocks are going to be
heavy. The pressure on commodity prices will continue.
In the third
quarter we do a survey of land values and, again, we saw somewhat of a
decline in land values. Whereas we thought we were somewhat in the
zone of stability with regard to land values I am beginning to hear
that we're going to see another slide off--nothing too sharp--but
nonetheless that we have a way to go before we get down to the bottom
level. And that suggests some more pressure on the agricultural
banks, so we've got more to do there. On the manufacturing side the
adjustment process goes on.
I might note just a couple of late
developments, which I'm sure you've read about. GM has this overhang
in the market.
They're probably going to close as many as 12 plants
and that, of course, will have a significant impact on the District in
terms of employment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How many plants do they have?

MR. KEEHN. Gee, I can't tell you that.
be a fairly big percentage.
MR. BLACK.

But I think 12 would

Almost by definition.

MR. KEEHN. Of that number probably 7 are going to be in our
District. We think the employment [effect] could be as high as say,
23,000, which would be a very, very significant number. Another
structural adjustment in the manufacturing sector comes
[unintelligible] engine. I think I commented the last time that they
were thinking about downsizing their domestic production. They have
now announced that and will be outsourcing to a heavier degree than
they have done in the past.
On the inflation side, I think the trend
is continuing to be favorable; what I hear anecdotally is very much
consistent with what Mike has suggested.
On the price side, as I hear
it, the conditions are very, very competitive and it's very tough to
get price increases to stick. And on the wage side, people are
continuing to get three-year contracts and very good work rule
changes; average costs are favorable so that the productivity aspects,
I think, have been pretty good.
As for the outlook, certainly, our forecast is consistent
with the staff's forecast. We have every expectation that the
expansion will continue at, say, 2-1/2 to 3 percent. And importantly,
we see no current signs that we can fall back into a recession; but on
the other side, we don't think that there's a significant risk that we
would break out on the up side either.
So, we're broadly consistent
with the staff forecast.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I keep hearing about all these great work
rule changes and enormous hope for productivity increases and I look
at these figures and I see no productivity increases. Would Mr. Prell
please explain to me the discrepancy between what I hear and what I
read?

11/5/86

MR. PRELL.
It seems like whenever I'm up here giving a
briefing the same question arises about the productivity figures.
I
think many of these collective bargaining agreements involve the
manufacturing sector where the data would indicate that we have been
getting fairly substantial increases in productivity--maybe not as
much as the anecdotal evidence for individual companies would suggest
For this cycle the gains are
but, on the whole, quite good gains.
much more favorable in comparison to past cyclical experience than for
the rest of the economy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
experience?
MR. PRELL.
MR. ANGELL.

Well,

More favorable than past cyclical

I guess at

least

as favorable as--

Yes.

MR. PRELL.
-- previous cycles in contrast to the overall
But, as you know, the total for the nonfarm business sector
picture.
has been less favorable and the data, such as they are, show that in a
number of the more service-oriented sectors we just aren't seeing
productivity improvement.
Of course, what this means--and I've had several
MR. ANGELL.
conversations with our staff over this--is that, with productivity in
manufacturing doing what it is and the way we go about measuring it,
And that
we have to have negative productivity in the service sector.
raises the question as to how we measure productivity in the service
So there is
sector; the fact of the matter is that we really don't.
some kind of strange averaging process going on there.
I think
there's really grave doubt as to what our productivity in the service
sector is.
But if productivity in the service sector is stronger than
we're measuring then that means, of course, that our economy is doing
a little better than we are measuring.
So there are those two aspects
that are very interesting.
MR. BOEHNE.

There's another aspect to take--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
productivity?
MR. ANGELL.

computers mean less

No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOEHNE.

You don't think more

That depends on how one--

On this issue of work rules, we have

an auto

They
plant in our District run by one of the big three auto makers.
think that their biggest problem in the American [work]place is not so
much price or productivity as it is quality--actual quality and the
perception of quality.
This is such an interesting story that I'm
going to visit the plant.
I talked to the manager there the other day
and he says that they are putting their emphasis not so much on how
many cars they can get out in a day but on how many cars they can get
out that don't have defects.
And they think that is where the payoff
is in terms of the market. Now, I don't think our productivity
figures capture that sort of thing, but it certainly is an improvement
in the output if you can do it right the first time.

11/5/86

MS. SEGER. Yes, but you had to get some work rule changes to
improve the quality.
MR. BOEHNE. That's exactly what my point is: that the work
rule changes are going into the quality aspects rather than improving
the measurable productivity.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It decreases the GNP; we don't have all

those repairs that go in there!
MR. PRELL. A different aspect of quality in a more secular
rather than cyclical area is the question of quality of the labor
force. Some researchers have suggested that [taking account of] the
quality adjustment in the labor force--[based on] indexes like SAT
scores or mix of workers or whatever--you find that our labor
productivity growth trends have not been as bad in historical context
as they look. It's a very controversial area.
MR. BLACK. If we have a flu epidemic [unintelligible], Mr.
Chairman, that would decrease GNP too.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [The way] the SAT scores work,
[there are] negatives and positives.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible] but that's what he says.
Productivity in the educational system is going down.
MR. PRELL.

Well, if you wanted to use SAT scores and--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. I agree with Bob Parry. I think the evidence
we're looking at today suggests that the economy is strengthening. We
have the new orders in durable goods and capital goods; we have
strengthening in basic materials prices. We've been looking for a
decline in the trade deficit to really carry the economy next year and
we're getting very strong anecdotal evidence that this is taking
place. When we had the Beigebook survey I found that every company
that was interviewed that does a significant export business reported
an increase in export orders--aircraft engines by GE, computers,
medical instruments, and so on. Right across the board, there were
very widespread increases in orders for exports. We always get very
impatient waiting for this two-year lag to take place, but the turn
seems to be coming on schedule.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It sure is in our projection.

I hope it's

there.
MR. TRUMAN. Mr. Chairman, our sense is that the September
trade numbers that were released, the so-called statistical month[end] numbers, were probably better than the underlying trend. So
that means that for the sum of these months--October, November, and
December--we're going to get some very much worse numbers. If you
look at the raw data--not the nice leading indicators President Morris
has cited--they are a little peculiar because the export numbers are
not particularly good. In fact, most of the improvement in the August
and September numbers is in the import side where, although we're
expecting a slowdown, we're not expecting a drop off.

-13-

11/5/86

MR. MORRIS.
[Unintelligible] phenomenon for the last couple
of months. And so we shouldn't expect to see them recorded in the
actual shipments for another 6 months or so.
MR. PARRY. I'm not quite sure I understand what you're
saying, Ted. You have a $19.3 billion improvement in the real net
export position. That's got to show up-MR. TRUMAN. Half of that is oil.
this fourth quarter is oil.

Half of what's going on in

MR. PARRY. Yes, but I think it's going to show up in the
monthly numbers; if the monthly numbers get much worse than they were
in September you're not going to get a $19.3-MR. TRUMAN. Yes, but if we had to redo the forecast with the
numbers that now exist the third quarter would look better. The
fourth quarter might not be changed much.
MR. PARRY.

I see.

MR. TRUMAN. And that's based just on the fact that it looks
like we've got some lower imports--that we're probably going to get
negative numbers, or not so big numbers, on the import side in the
Exports are beginning to come in a lot more, as Mike
fourth quarter.
mentioned. On the current import side our sense is that the monthly
number ends up getting built into the quarterly GNP numbers and then
you're stuck with them for-MR. PARRY.
improvement?
MR. TRUMAN.

So you're comfortable with the second-half
Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARRY.

You're finished?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. Our numbers for the District continue to look
pretty good. We continue to have better growth in non-ag employment
than we've experienced nationally. Retail sales in the most recent
three-month period have gone up more rapidly. And we've had a
turnaround on the construction side where we have been lagging a bit;
both residential and nonresidential construction in the third quarter
were quite strong. Anecdotally, on the retail side, a national
retailer in the District mentioned that for three months now they've
experienced stronger numbers; he wouldn't describe it as a boom
situation by any means, but it's the first time for a long period of
time that he has seen three months--August, September and October-with continued improvement in terms of their own sales.
On the price
side, we had a group of small business owners in for lunch not too
long ago and I asked them whether any of the developments in terms of
markets and expectations of higher prices were affecting their
behavior at all.
And there was certainly no evidence among that small
group that they felt any better able to put through price increases or

-14-

11/5/86

were seeing any major increases in their costs.
there is no real change in the price picture.

So, at that level,

I would say on the overall forecast that the one difference
we might cite is that we would tend to be a little more [positive] on
the personal consumption side just because of the rate of increase in
income growth over the course of this year versus last year. As Mike
pointed out, the fourth-quarter GNP number is more than accounted for
by net exports and the inventory numbers; and if personal consumption
were to be stronger we could be looking, in the short run, at
considerably stronger GNP numbers.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. At the District level, I think our numbers
continue to look rather good, although quite varied. Pennsylvania is
a state that has characteristics both of East Coast prosperity and
some of the problems of the industrial Midwest. But on the whole, the
numbers have continued to make us look better than the nation as a
whole. At the anecdotal level I have noted a less pessimistic view
Two or three months ago
among manufacturers about the trade business.
they were very skeptical that the drop in the value of the dollar was
going to have much of an impact. What I notice now is that their
orders have begun to pick up and inquiries to their firms are picking
up.
They now are feeling a little better--feeling that they may be
I think that is a subtle but
getting back into this ball game.
important harbinger of what might lie ahead.
At the national level, we tend to go up and down in this
I think back over the last year and it seems we get one
Committee.
month of figures that look better and we feel better; and then we come
back the next month and the figures are a little less; we sort of go
If we seasonally adjusted it all my guess is that we
up and down.
would conclude that things are probably unchanged. There is a touch
better evidence, I think, from the trade side as well as in some of
I think we need a little more
the forward looking indicators.
information to conclude that there has been a significant improvement.
But having said that, I think that the latest statistics tend to make
one feel a little better about a broadly unchanged outlook.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, in the Sixth District the
situation has not changed very much over the past six weeks, which is
Picking up on
to say that conditions are pretty mixed in the area.
something that Mike Prell mentioned, there seems to be growing concern
that the tighter restrictions on municipal finance and the smaller
grants in aid as a result of the tax bill are going to slow the area's
efforts to improve the public infrastructure and provide needed social
The weak areas in the District--that is energy and
services.
agricultural--continue to be weak. We got a little benefit from the
reduction in the drought situation, but the rains came a bit too late
to help most of the crops. Confirming what the staff said about the
rig count, we find that in Louisiana the rig count actually has risen
slightly in the last couple of months, although I hasten to add that
conditions in Louisiana and in that general energy patch are still
very, very depressed. Another area that continues to concern a number
of people is the office overbuilding situation.
In the Atlanta

11/5/86

downtown area it doesn't look too bad; the vacancy rate is about 15
percent.
But as you move to the outskirts, particularly with newer
development, vacancy rates are as high as 40 percent.
That average is
not as high as in other cities but office overbuilding clearly is a
very serious problem and is continuing to be so.
The same is true for
multifamily rental units, which are experiencing record high vacancy
rates.
In spite of all those negatives, as I talk to people I think
there is a fair degree of optimism about what's happening not only in
the District but in the country. There is a feeling that the faster
pace of activity in the third quarter is going to be sustained and
there is growing confidence, supported by some of the recent numbers,
that the trade sector is going to do better.
In fact, we have seen in
our District orders from textiles pick up significantly over the past
month or two. There are early indications--perhaps more anecdotal
than anything else--or some suggestion of a pickup in agricultural
exports as well.
Looking at the national picture, our outlook is very much the
same as the Greenbook's. We think that for the next several quarters
we are going to have a growth rate for real GNP that's close to the 3
percent mentioned in the Greenbook. But that kind of growth is
hinging on consumer spending and on an improvement in the trade
deficit.
We're putting most of our money in those areas, as it were.
And I have some concern that perhaps we won't get the kinds of
improvements that we're looking for there.
So I would think that if
there's risk in the economy the risk is on the down side.
I say that
about consumer spending partly because the discretionary income that
people have as a result of the drop in oil prices is beginning to
trail off, as are some of the effects of the greater wealth
experienced in the form of a run-up in the stock and bond markets.
Another uncertainty in the whole picture is the extent to which
adjustments to the new tax law have already occurred versus how much
more there is to see.
We did a little survey, a very informal one,
but it suggested that about 50 percent of the businesses that we
talked to had built the adverse treatment of capital into their plans
before the tax law was enacted. Altogether, I think the picture is
encouraging; certainly, the District on average is doing better than
the nation as a whole and we think that the expansion is going to
continue. But again, I would stress that in my view the risk is on
the down side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. In the Fourth District we don't really see
evidence of a resurgence in the economy nor do we see anything that
would indicate that we're going into a recession. As I look around
the District I have the opinion that Ed Boehne expressed: that it's
sort of more of the same.
I think my directors in general and the
businessmen I talk to have that opinion.
I think we're more concerned
in our area about the restructuring that's going on in some specific
industries--steel and autos come particularly to mind, although I
suppose machine tools could be put on that list as well. But this
idea of an unchanged outlook, I think, is embodied in most forecasts
and I would have no quarrel with it.
On the District level, one of the interesting stories we're
looking at is the steel story. My view is that there is more and more
recognition by the management in those companies, and maybe by labor

-16-

11/5/86

as well, that the problem is not imports and it's not exchange rates
but that the problem is more basic than that--whether you call it
overcapacity or whether you call it inadequate demand to support
capacity.
They are beginning to look at that and simultaneously, I
think, are trying to deal with it constructively. Now, whether it can
be dealt with or not is another issue, because as they close plants
they have pension costs and the fringe benefit liabilities, and I
But at least
certainly don't see how they're going to deal with that.
I see a recognition of what the problem is and an attempt to deal with
it.
Of course, the USX strike has bought the industry time; it has
closed down something like the proportion of capacity the industry
would like to see closed down. So a little time has been bought by
that.
We don't see in our District what Frank Morris sees on the
exports side. What we see in the foreign sector is that people are
beginning to feel better about import prices and that they are poised
and ready to take advantage of that by moving their own prices up as
I see a shift of attitude in
soon as they see the window to do it.
the foreign sector, but that's the one that I see.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Let me just comment on a couple of the changes in
our District because I think the fundamental two-tier nature of the
economy is well recognized, and that hasn't changed much in recent
months. Perhaps what shows most clearly the distinction between what
is happening in the rural areas as opposed to what's happening in the
metropolitan areas is that the unemployment rate in the Twin Cities is
That is really a rather remarkably low rate
now down to 3.7 percent.
for our economy. But that kind of prosperity is not translated in
general once you move out into the rural areas although, of course,
Some of
the cattle and hog producers are doing considerably better.
the producers in Montana, where they had a drought until this year,
and some of the wheat producers and others are feeling better, but I
Certainly, the agricultural
wouldn't want to make too much of that.
I think anecdotally though, some of what
problems persist in general.
has already surfaced at the table certainly is occurring in our
District.
There's just an awful lot of talk of potential improvement
That kind of talk seems to be occurring in some
in exports.
considerable magnitude and it's clear that people who are interested
in foreign business are starting to feel considerably better. As also
has been mentioned, at least as far as we are concerned, pricing
remains very, very competitive. One of the striking features that has
come up in conversations that I have had with business people recently
is that the pricing environment is still very competitive and they are
still very, very concerned about their costs and so forth. In
general, that would be a healthy aspect, in my mind.
As far as the overall economic outlook is concerned, I have
I think that's a
no particular quarrel with the Greenbook forecast.
respectable outlook and certainly, in the context of the fifth year of
an economic expansion, something that I can live with. My intuition
tells me we may do a touch better than that, but it is not the kind of
thing that I think is going to make a material difference in terms of
how the economy performs or in terms of what happens to rates of
inflation and so forth, at least over the horizon of the next four or
five quarters.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

11/5/86

-17-

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

As far as the general economic

outlook is concerned I would associate myself with the broad profile

of the staff forecast.
I think the risks are pretty well balanced.
I
would add that I would consider an outcome over the next five quarters
like the staff forecast quite acceptable, considering where we are in
the business cycle and considering the range of structural problems

that are out there that really don't have a heck of a lot to do with
monetary policy in the short run. One thing that bothers me is that I
can't for the life of me figure out what to make of this tax bill.
It's so complex. I think we're just going to have to wait and see how
that shakes out. But it is a major uncertainty as far as I'm
concerned. On the trade side, we too encounter many, many anecdotal
comments along the lines that Frank Morris and Gary Stern have
mentioned. And at this point I think they're more broadly based by
industry groupings. A few months ago we heard some of that in
chemicals and paper and that was about it. But now there is some in
other industry groups as well. An interesting little side light to
that on the other side of the equation--the import side--came up in a
discussion Sam Cross and I had with some Swiss people yesterday. Now,
Switzerland is not a great exporter to the United States; but
nevertheless they indicated to us that just in the past several weeks
there had been a very sharp decline in orders at Swiss companies for
exports to the United States, presumably concentrated in so-called
high-tech and electronic types of products. Again, not that
Switzerland is a big exporter to the United States, but it was rather
a dramatic report just because it seemed to be so sharp and so sudden
in terms of their experience. I have a couple of other anecdotal
items. I had a conversation with a fellow from one of the largest
mail order houses in the United States at a business leaders meeting
we had on the 22nd of October. He told me that in the first three
weeks of October--which is kind of the beginning of the Christmas
buying season for a mail order firm--they had set records across the
board in terms of their mail order business. The other development,
which is regional in character or is maybe just in the New York
metropolitan area, is that the housing market and the labor market in
the New York metropolitan area continue to really be booming. Prices
of houses are just out of sight. On the labor market side I'll
provide a great vignette: I noticed Saturday when I was out doing a
couple of errands that the help wanted signs for part-time workers in
service-type establishments seemed to abound. That, of course, is a
very local phenomenon, but nevertheless--. Overall, as I said, I
think the staff forecast is a reasonable one and an outcome that I
would find quite acceptable.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. As I see it, I don't think there has been a lot
of change in the business outlook since our last meeting. I think
those, led off by Bob Parry, who had the perception that people in the
market and other observers think the statistics look a little better
are correct. But if you look at them on a moving average basis
they're not quite as much better as you might think on the surface.
The anecdotal information we pick up from around our District, which
had been pretty good, I would say was a tad worse than it was maybe a
month ago. When I try to figure that out, I think one of the factors
is probably the paucity of any information that suggests that we're
getting any acceleration of the upturn. The other thing that seems to
me to be more important now is the doubt that business people seem to

11/5/86

have about the effects of the tax law on businesses.
For example, one
of our directors said at our last meeting that he estimated the tax
changes would cost his business $3 million more in 1986 and $5 million
more in 1987. And I think most of them are viewing it that way. But
I think the financial underpinnings are certainly there to accommodate
any kind of reasonable upturn that we might have in the economy.
I believe the staff is right in what it has done in the
Greenbook projection. As several people alluded to, if you break that
projection down between gross domestic purchases and net exports of
goods and services, you see that the projection shows gross domestic
purchases for next year running well below what they're doing this
year.
By dividing it that way it focuses pretty crucially on the
importance of the net exports side.
So, if we are to get an increase
in GNP that means that the net exports side of it has to come through.
I think that's a reasonable thing to expect; as several people have
noted, we are seeing a lot of anecdotal information that this kind of
thing is happening. There are all sorts of measures of how much the
dollar has depreciated, but when you get through all of those I think
you have to conclude that in real terms there has been a pretty
So I think it would be rather
significant depreciation in the dollar.
surprising if we didn't get some kind of a turnaround in our real
balance of payments with this kind of improvement in the terms of
trade. We think we'll see that more, of course, in the real figures
in the GNP than in these monthly census figures on merchandise trade.
But after the deflation, I think it's going to
They may not show up.
I don't know whether
show up in net exports of goods and services.
it's of any value or not, but one of our economists ran a VAR model
and he usually gets results almost diametrically opposed to what the
Board staff has; but that [model] suggested about the same kind of
It might concern you
improvement that the Board staff has projected.
more that two models suggest the same thing than if neither did!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.
MR. JOHNSON.

What's a VAR?

Vector autoregression is what it stands for.
I think it's a modern times series model.

MR. BLACK.
It came along after we finished our graduate
work, Mr. Chairman, so we weren't really exposed to it in those days.
So, we would buy the staff's forecast and we would say the chances of
error are about equal on each side of it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I don't have very much new or
different to report for the Eleventh District.
Things have continued
pretty much as they have been. We do think that we're at the trough,
as I reported last time, or certainly very close to it.
I guess you'd
say it has stabilized or has become stagnant, whichever term you want
to use.
As hard as we're looking, we really don't see any visible
evidence of an upturn but neither are we finding evidence that it's
getting worse. As a result of our District's economic conditions, the
banking situation doesn't seem to be improving. Looking at the
national economy, we don't have any real issue to take with the staff
forecast. We might tend to be a little less optimistic on real

11/5/86

growth--but not anything very significant--and to a certain degree on
the inflation outlook than they projected.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Ms. Seger.

MS. SEGER. As I've been thinking about this year and our
different views as we've gone through the year, it seems to me that
there has been some general paring of forecasts for real GNP,
particularly for 1987.
I still think, even with that, that there is
some downside risk, particularly in the next 6 to 9 months or so.
I
hope Mike Prell is right that the auto bulge is going to be
straightened out this quarter, but maybe because I'm cynical about the
auto industry and things can vary I just sense that they've borrowed
more from the future and that it's going to take more time to make
that up, unfortunately. Also, I continue to be a worrywart about the
consumer debt situation. When I read the article about Sears and its
experience with rising amounts of uncollectibles, and so forth, that
didn't make me feel any better. Also, in the multifamily housing area
I heard a story--anecdotal but I think it may suggest that we have
tremendous problems in apartment vacancies--that down in Bob Boykin's
area they're giving free braces to people who are willing to sign twoI guess that just shows that the dentists
year leases for apartments.
own the buildings!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible.]

MS. SEGER. Oh, you can get braces now up to age 60.
I'd say
the market is probably pretty big. Anyhow, I think it does suggest
that there's some urgency here to move people into these empty
buildings. Again, that didn't make me feel terribly good. And that's
without even considering the tax reform items.
I really think that
the tax reform is going to hit the multifamily or the apartment area
probably as hard as any sector of the economy.
It's sure going to
knock off some of these limited partnerships that have been used to
finance them. And for offices the same is true: there are lots of
vacancies and it's very difficult to unload space.
I don't believe
I've heard it mentioned at the table here but there's a real problem
coming up with hotels because so many have been built.
It's not just
in Washington, D.C. where all the lobbyists control them, but in many
parts of the country there has been a lot of hotel construction and
it's reaching the point where there is an excess of rooms and some
real downward pressure on plans to put up additional hotels. Finally,
in relying heavily on the trade turnaround I certainly hope that it
takes place.
I've heard some stories about additional orders for
American exporters or soundings on the possibility of additional
export business.
But I also continue to hear stories about how
difficult it is to meet the import competition from the countries that
we seem to ignore, countries like Canada and Korea and Hong Kong. And
it seems to me that if we're going to close this gap we've got to
address both sides--not just expand our exports but put a damper on
our imports.
I'm not talking about trade restrictions, believe me.
But I don't see a lot of evidence that the import surge is slowing
down.
So I guess I'm just generally negative today.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me ask a question about multifamily
housing.
I hear about all of these surpluses, which I assume are
true, but my impression is that rents are still going up at about the
same rate of speed.
Is that true?

-20-

11/5/86

MR. PRELL. The CPI measure hasn't shown any significant
change in the rate of increase recently.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How do you explain that seeming dichotomy?

MR. PRELL. Well, I'm not sure we can. One thing that may be
a source of concern about that measurement is the treatment of vacant
units. They evidently make some adjustments for the discontinuous
movements in rents that occur after units have been vacated. While we
can't manage to get into the details of how they're actually doing
these adjustments we think there could be some upward bias in the
measurement of rent increases recently.
MR. MORRIS. Also, the big recent increases are in the
Northeast where the vacancy rates are very low.
MR. PRELL. That's another point. The sample may not be
capturing the developments across the country correctly because it may
not be representative of the current regional mix.
MR. BOYKIN. There are other things going on, too, that the
numbers might not capture. Talk about the incentives on the
There are a lot of incentives on multifamily units,
commercial side!
as evidenced by the signs in front of a lot of these projects saying
"The move is on us!" with a picture of a moving truck. They say they
will pick up the moving expenses, give free rent the first six months,
and then talk about the rental rate later. There are all kinds of
incentives at work, so it may be that for reporting purposes the [true
cost of a] rental is not actually being shown. By the time you work
in-MR. STERN. It would be interesting to know how long some of
these units were standing vacant, actually.
MR. BOYKIN. Jerry Corrigan talked about the very rapid price
In Dover a friend of
movements in homes, and we are having that too.
mine just offered $100,000 less than the asking price and the owner
took it before my friend could even back off.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BOYKIN.

You have rich friends [unintelligible].

It was just a $300,000 house.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, it was a $400,000 house.

Mr.

Guffey.
MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, with respect to the national
picture, we don't have any serious difference with the Greenbook
forecast. This time again, as has been said around the table, that
[forecast] depends greatly upon the turnaround in our net export
position; absent that we would expect a still positive rate of growth
but more in the 1 to 1-1/2 percent range. So it's extremely important
that we get that kind of turnaround to achieve 3 percent growth in the
next five quarters.
With regard to the District economy, not a great deal has
changed. We still have the unbalanced condition that Gary Stern
Urban
described in his District of the urban versus the rural areas.

11/5/86

areas seem to be doing very well with the exception of the oil patch
cities; Oklahoma City and Tulsa still are very depressed, but other
cities such as Denver and Kansas City, or even Omaha, are moving along
at fairly good clips--particularly the Kansas City area.
Manufacturing in the District is very mixed. Auto production--and we
are fairly large in auto assembly within the District--is moving along
at a full two-shift operation. The rumor that we have heard is that
instead of 12 GM plants closing it's only 6 and at least one is in the
Kansas City area.
However, the offset to that is that there is a very
large plant being constructed now in Kansas City; so it may involve
just an upgrading of their plant facilities, as far as our local
economy is concerned.
Interestingly enough, the high-tech sector,
particularly the chip industry in Kansas City and in Denver, seems to
have an uptick and that is largely attributed to the relationship of
the dollar. The strengthening seems to have come about even though
their competition was, among others, Taiwan. Although that
relationship hasn't changed, apparently they feel that they are back
in competition again where they were priced out of competition at an
earlier time. With regard to other manufacturing sectors--such as
farm equipment and
oil field equipment--those are still very
depressed, largely because of the agricultural situation.
With regard to agriculture, net farm income will be
essentially the same as it was last year. But breaking that down, the
red meat sector--I'm talking about hogs and beef prices--has been very
good.
With the low commodity feed prices they have an all-time good
spread; so there is money being made in that.
That's being used
largely to service some of the agricultural debt and hopefully it will
buy a little more time.
In the farm sector, we just completed our
third-quarter survey and two things fall out of that. One is that the
decline in agricultural [land] prices continues. The second quarter
showed a decrease in agricultural real estate values of about 2
percent and that continues in the third-quarter survey, as contrasted
with a decline of 6 to 7 percent in the fourth quarter of 1985.
So
the decline is slowing and, hopefully, we are getting at or near the
bottom. The other important number that falls out of that survey of
agricultural banks is the fact that the loan-to-deposit ratio is the
lowest that it has been since our survey started in 1976.
That is, it
is now resting at a 52 percent loan-to-deposit ratio in agricultural
banks. That's largely attributed to the fact that there is a lot of
liquidity but there are no good agricultural loans that they can find;
as a result, they are sitting with that liquidity.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Angell.

MR. ANGELL.
I think the most unusual development is that we
haven't had anyone around the table who has taken exception with the
staff's inflation forecast.
This is the first time that I remember
that someone hasn't suggested that inflation is going to be higher
than the staff forecast. That may be good news if that is shared
around the producers; it may very well be that we don't have those
deflationary and disinflationary forces that may depress the economy.
I am getting somewhat optimistic because even though I have stayed
with a 2-1/2 percent [forecast] in regard to real growth, it is
getting close enough to the staff's forecast that I see very little
difference.
It seems to me that our economy is rather recession
resistant in the sense that the proportion of population of elderly-retired with social security and retirement income--is kind of a nice

11/5/86

-22-

floor.
Farm programs do provide a safety net, and certainly, the
service sector tends to produce income flows to a large portion of the
U.S. economy that tends to make it not too susceptible to a dramatic
downturn.
Certainly, there have been no indications of any inventory
accumulation based upon price expectations, and so there is very
I do
little danger of any typical inventory-lagged kind of recession.
think there is quite a bit of risk, of course, of those sectors that
the staff is forecasting to increase just matching in very nicely with
those that may have been decreasing. So there has to be some risk of
that [not] occurring. But I would be at a loss to suggest which way
the risk is the greatest.
It would seem to me that if we avoid any
You know,
dramatic alterations in the money growth path downward--.
we have been running Ml at a 16 percent path and I think we all find
If we had it to do over
it surprising to look back and see that.
again I am not sure we would have chosen a lower [path], given the way
velocity turned out; but if there is any downside risk, it might show
up in a rather quick change from a 16 percent growth path to a 6
percent growth path.
If that were to occur, we ought to look at that.
I don't know whether it is occurring or not; I think there might be
some evidence as one might expect. We are getting to nearly three
months without a discount rate cut and that's almost unheard of this
year; probably in that environment we might expect the M1 growth path
to show a change. The leading indicator that I run says that may be
happening. So it seems to me that we do have a fairly good outlook.
I agree with Roger Guffey that the meat producing segment of
the farm economy, which at times can account for half of net farm
income, has profit margins or spreads that are about the best we have
seen. Even though we haven't seen a trend toward higher numbers, the
feedlot operators know how to keep them in the lots a little longer
and have them go at higher rates; consequently, we do have some
opportunity for some good food price news, perhaps with regard to some
continued downward news in poultry and hogs and finally beef prices.
Let me end by suggesting that all is not well on the price front: I
think we have a danger.
I think it's quite likely that the President
will receive on his desk a trade bill before next spring has passed
and I think that might pose the first warning sign of a danger on the
inflation front.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I feel pretty comfortable about the
staff's longer-run forecast, despite the fact that we are seeing an
aging of the expansion of the economy over the next year.
I am
somewhat less comfortable about the short-range forecast--that is,
over this current quarter and the next quarter, largely because the
rate of growth that we are expecting is highly dependent on
inventories and net exports. And that, of course, [unintelligible]
for a fairly chancy outcome.
I certainly agree with Wayne that there
are a lot of other sectors in the economy that are components of the
GNP.
So I think that at this time we are forced back more than usual
on the anecdotal evidence. I am encouraged by what I hear around the
table that basically the feelings and the mood are good and/or better;
chances are much greater that we will see some improvement in the
short run, over the next couple of quarters, than no improvement.
But
this is a time when I think we just have to sit back and wait to see

what will happen.

11/5/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Anybody else have any comments?

MR. HELLER. Well, I agree broadly with the views expressed
by the staff and by the speakers around the table.
In particular, I
think three developments are very heartening. First, the reduction in
the federal imbalance--and if you take the state and local in
together, the deficit is down to just slightly over $110 billion.
Second, the external sector imbalance is being reduced. And third,
the agricultural and oil-patch situation [seems to be] bottoming out.
So, overall, I think we are seeing a strong reduction in the
structural imbalances here.
And I think that all bodes well for the
success of the staff forecast.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't have much to add.
I think just about
everything has been said. The staff forecast is looking better and
better. The latest evidence is consistent with the pickup in exports,
though it may be too early yet for that to be conclusive. But I do
think that the anecdotal [evidence] and some of the aggregate numbers
are consistent with the staff forecast, so I feel fairly comfortable
with that.
It comes just in the nick of time, really. Some of the
improved aggregate statistics on the trade side along with both the
proposed change in fiscal policy and the drop in the discount rate in
Japan were timed well.
I think [those developments] relieved a lot of
the concern building in the financial markets about what was going to
happen to the dollar, what kind of pressures that was going to bring
on us, and whether the economy was going to remain weak. All of that
has led to some relief in the financial markets.
You can almost see
it; you can see it in some flattening of the yield curve.
I think we
have a little more breathing room now and I feel a little less
pressured than I did last time looking at this situation. Still, I
think it is too early to pass judgment on whether we are out of the
woods.
But certainly, the evidence is consistent with the projection
that we have, so I feel better.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just make a couple of comments
about the international situation. This was not stated when we were
discussing Japan and Germany earlier. So far as Japan is concerned,
the most important point to make about their recent actions,
particularly the discount rate change--which is good news, I guess--is
that undoubtedly they acted because they are really worried about
their business outlook now. That's the bad news.
I don't think the
Japanese economy has looked very good for some time, but the Bank of
Japan seems to be convinced that it's not very good and that the
growth prospects at the moment are not very satisfactory. Mr. Truman
just gave me the announcement of German industrial production in
September; the figures just came out this morning, I guess.
I don't
know what to make of it; it's a big reduction when the August figure,
which was initially .3, is revised down to -.1 and then it's -1.7 in
September.
That gives a rather sick cast to their industrial
production.
They accompanied the announcement with a statement that
they expect an upward revision of close to 2 percent.
I don't know
what kind of statistics they have [when they realease a figure that
is] down 1.7 and say they expect it to be revised upward by 2 percent.
So think of that what you would like to think. Even with that upward
revision it would not be very strong in the third quarter; it doesn't
quite bear out these much happier GNP figures they have.
I thought
that Governor Heller or Governor Angell might mention a little
curiosity--I don't know whether it's literally true, but it's very

-24-

11/5/86

close to being true--that despite all of this agony in the farm
sector, which is very real, we may have record net farm income this
year.
It's a little odd to have all of this agony at the same time
that you have record income, which will almost all be funded by
government payments. For whatever reason, there it is.
If you don't
have any debts on the farm, I guess you are doing all right.
MR. RICE.
increasing?

Mr. Chairman, on Japan: Aren't their exports still

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

They think the export orders are actually

down.
MR. TRUMAN. Yes, their exports are down.
The last couple of
months the volume has actually picked up a bit, but I think that may
be shipping. When volumes are down, then-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Volume is down year over year.

MR. TRUMAN. The last couple of months they have done a
little better, but basically they are down.
MR. RICE.
has increased.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. ANGELL.
in yen prices-MR. RICE.

In the last couple of months their trade surplus

Well, in dollar terms

[unintelligible].

In dollar terms, but not in yen terms.

You see,

Okay.

MR. ANGELL. Yen prices are lower and volume is lower, so the
yen value of exports is down.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Of course, that's what's affecting the
domestic economy as we feared. Besides that, they don't import much.
The big contrast between Japan and Germany is that in Germany imports,
including imports from Japan, are going up rather sharply.
I don't
think Japanese imports are going up much.
in Japan.

MR. HELLER. Domestic demand in Germany is much better than
That's the big difference. And investment too

[unintelligible]--

MR. JOHNSON. How much of that is based on the oil price, and
is it going to level off?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Governor Johnson just mentioned this
change in the dollar and so forth.
I have a better feeling for the
moment; I don't know how long it will last.
In some sense it gives us
a little more flexibility; we may not want to use it, but it removes
one constraint on our fine tuning as we go along. Right at the
moment, I'm kind of on this [unintelligible] curve.
I can't refrain
from saying that there are two things that bother me, looking at a
longer-term prospective, that are particularly relevant to what we do
now.
I am struck, particularly [by the comments of] the first people
who were talking, that we are doing much better on wages.
Mr. Prell

11/5/86

and other people tell us that it really has been quite remarkable.
Productivity in manufacturing, at least, seems to be pretty good.
They are keeping their costs under control and everybody says all of
these manufacturers are sitting there champing at the bit to raise
prices.
They can't do it, but at the first opportunity that comes
along they are going to raise prices.
I just wonder about the
consistency of these things and what they tell us about the psychology
of the American business sector. You have twenty years of inflation,
that's normal; and if you can't raise prices that's not normal, even
if you are making production gains and keeping your costs under
control.
There seems to be something the matter there. Then I hear
about all of these capacity cutbacks--I don't want to generalize too
far, maybe it's just in orders on steel--but if we are going to have
these high exports in the future and we are going to have these
restrained imports that we are talking about, presumably that means
manufacturing activity does a lot better in the United States.
I
would think some of that improvement in the trade balance has to come
in the automobile industry. And if that's true, what are we doing
reducing plants by 6 or 12 or whatever it is [unintelligible]
increasing them, may be [unintelligible].
But it bothers me.
MR. MELZER. One of the things that I failed to mention is
that a big plant, a new plant, in Westfield that doesn't run a third
shift has very efficient [unintelligible].
In a downtown truck plant
that is closing, 2,000 or 2,500 laborers might get laid off and this
other facility expects to pick up as many as 2,000 of those.
So,
maybe there is some of that going on.
MR. KEEHN. It is a capacity shift as opposed to necessarily
a capacity reduction. The plants I mentioned clearly are older and
outmoded; it is a way of trimming them as opposed to making a very
fundamental, huge reduction [in capacity].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
maintaining production?

You think in the context of at least

MR. KEEHN. Well, I think they will reduce their production
but not in the magnitude that the numbers would suggest.
As Roger
says, they are adding a plant in Kansas City. They are right; there
are a number of plants where they can add a second and third shift to
pick up the production.
MR. PRELL. Over the next few years foreign car producers are
going to have substantial amounts of added capacity.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How much does that amount to?

MR. PRELL.
It seems to me that I have seen figures that by
early 1990 it will be 1 million units a year; that's a vague
recollection.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. One place I suppose we can make gains in
that connection is that a lot of these foreign plants were
established, I am sure, with the intention of importing almost all the
components. But if an American company can get in there and provide
more of the components--which seems possible--you get a pickup almost
invisibly this time.

11/5/86

Some of them are creating their own partsMR. PRELL.
producing facilities.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I think it's important to realize that
what's in the bag is a cessation of the worsening of our trade
That is going to show up in the GNP numbers rather
balance.
substantially just because we have stopped worsening our position.
But it remains to be seen whether in a sense we are substantially
narrowing that trade deficit.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This forecast has pretty big increases in
exports and no increases in imports. And that surely is a change in
trend, if it comes about.
MS. SEGER. Getting to the plant closings: if you look at the
details I think you will find that they are not all assembly plants.
And the grim news is
There is a foundry; there are parts plants, etc.
that as they close, they will be importing some of those items that GM
now produces in Saginaw, Michigan, and so forth.
MR. ANGELL. But the point of it is that there is outsourcing
in the United States as well as outsourcing abroad. A lot of this is
outsourcing right out of the boundaries.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
have our break?
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Why don't we hear from Mr. Kohn and then

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Statement--see

Okay, let's have a break.
[Coffee break]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let's get the show on the road.
like to take an initiative?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
to take an initiative.

I'd like to take an initiative not

MR. BOEHNE.

How about no change?

MR. ANGELL.

Ditto.

MR. JOHNSON.

Who would

I would not mind suggesting one little nuance.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Is this in the nature of an "ooze"

or what?
MS. SEGER.

Stampede.

I will take it that this affirmation of no
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
change means no change in the borrowing and presumably in the numbers
that we use, although there is a little question as to whether we
I don't think it makes any difference in the
should move those.
numbers if we move the time frame to the fourth quarter instead of
I am indifferent, but it's somewhat more normal to use
from August.
the fourth-quarter figure. That would not make any difference in the

11/5/86

-27-

Forgetting about the nuances in
numbers; it just affects the words.
Okay.
the language at this point, is that what we are talking about?
The floor is open for nuances.
MR. JOHNSON. The nuance I had in mind is that since the last
FOMC meeting perhaps conditions have changed sufficiently to take the
asymmetry out of our wording and either leave it totally symmetric or
It would be fine with me if we
shift the nuance to the other side.
made it totally symmetric, but I have a slight preference for shifting
I think we ought to change that nuance and
the nuance the other way.
that's about all.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Can we put on the table taking out at

least-MR. JOHNSON.

Take out "would" and use "might."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's right; make them both "mights" or
shift the "would" to the easier reserves part.
MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, even though "would/might" sounds
like some kind of obnoxious insect such as a tick, I would still like
to keep our "would/might."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, what is the feeling about symmetry?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

symmetry.

I can go along with symmetry.

MR. BOEHNE.

Symmetry.

MR. ANGELL.

I would prefer symmetry.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it sounds like a consensus for
Should these be "woulds" or "mights"?
MR. ANGELL.
MR. BLACK.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

"Woulds."
Yes,

I agree with that.

No, "mights."
No.

Symmetry would be "woulds."

I guess it doesn't matter as long as we use the
MR. JOHNSON.
same word on both sides.
MR. BLACK.
MR. ANGELL.

This is going to be a long meeting.
Well, this is a very significant issue.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't have any strong feeling either
[way], but I'd suggest "might" as being slightly more [appropriate];
don't hear anybody talking about wanting to change now in a very
Mr. Kohn raised a question about whether we want to
active sense.
Any preference between "slightly"
change "slightly" to "somewhat."
and "somewhat"?
MR. GUFFEY.

I think it's "slightly."

I

-28-

11/5/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

On the same theory you would make it

"might" - -

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
"slightly."

"Might" is consistent with

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What about these [proposed] changes that
On the first reading I don't see that they change
Mr. Kohn made?
anything: change "exceptionally large increase" to "exceptional pace;"
What is-and "past" to "previous."
MR. KOHN. The point was that the way it read before it
wasn't clear over what period the Committee was expecting Ml to
So I tried, by
[The question was]: as compared to what?
moderate.
putting "over the same period" to convey that it was the August-toDecember or the September-to-December period compared to "over the
summer."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you see more of a difference between
Since I see no substantive
"previous" and "past" than I do.
difference between them, I guess it just raises the question of
whether it's worth changing the language.
MR. HELLER. Oh, "previous" is slightly clearer, isn't it?
Because "the past" would include the months in the period that he was
talking about earlier.
MR. BOEHNE.

Do you want

"previous might" or "would be"?

[For] September to December I think it
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
makes absolutely no difference, since we had it this way, with
It would make just a slight substantive difference if
"exceptional."
we thought the higher end of this range in September [unintelligible].
August to December means it includes August too.
MR. KOHN. No, it's from an August base;
September, October, November.

so it would be

So the difference is whether you include
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If the figures came
September and September was toward the high side.
in low you have a month of high [growth] that would be in the
calculations.
MR. KOHN. Look on page 6, Mr. Chairman. For alternative B,
the August-to-December growth we have is 8.4 percent for M2 and 7.4
percent for M3.
For September-to-December growth we have the same
thing for M2, so that's no difference at all; but it's slightly lower
for M3.
A range of 7 to 9 percent would do for both.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's just a matter of presentation.
Usually in these mid-quarterly dates we talk about the quarter and not
about a period longer than a quarter. Before the quarter this time we
did add August; as we sometimes do, we included an extra month. What
do you want to do?
MR. ANGELL.

Use the September.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do you want to change to September?

11/5/86

-29-

MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, that's all right.

MR. ANGELL.
I would like to make a case:
If the monetary
aggregates came in exceptionally weak, I would hope it would not be a
"slight" and a "might."
MR. HELLER.
I actually disagree with you a little on that
one.
I think we should look forward to the time when the monetary
aggregates would slow down.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, we should.

But how abruptly?

If we are continuing to get a good tight

economy--

rates

MR. MORRIS. Well, as long as you are not driving interest
[up] at the same time.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody else have anything to say?
It would read: "In the implementation of policy the Committee seeks to
maintain the existing degree of reserve restraint. This action is
expected to be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period
from September to December at annual rates of 7 to 9 percent. While
growth in Ml over the same period is expected to moderate from"--we'll
take these refinements; that will produce a whole article in the Fed
Fortnightly.
MR. BLACK.

Don't you have to take out "respectively," Mr.

Chairman?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Yes, we took out "respectively."
It's 7
to 9 percent.
"While growth in M1 over the same period is expected to
moderate from its exceptional pace during the previous several months,
growth in this aggregates will continue to be judged in the light of
the behavior of M2 and M3 and other factors.
Slightly greater reserve
restraint might or slightly lesser reserve reserve might be
acceptable" etc.
And we have 4 to 8 percent on the federal funds
rate. Any other comments?
MR. GUFFEY.

I think we ought to take a vote.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

If we are prepared, we can take a vote.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Guffey
Governor Heller
President Horn
Governor Johnson
President Morris
Governor Rice
Governor Seger

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a couple of housekeeping items.
I
thought we might meet for two days in December [unintelligible] in the
discussion of how we handle next year.
That, of course, raises not

11/5/86

-30-

exactly a new event but a considerable question about what we do about
Ml in particular. So if that's all right we will schedule the meeting
to begin on Monday afternoon instead of on Tuesday. Also, I think you
The only
have had a tentative schedule of next year's meetings.
question I am aware of that has arisen is that a couple of people
raised a question about the meeting scheduled during Christmas week.
I would like to indicate that we work during [unintelligible].
END OF MEETING

