Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
July 8-9, 1986

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, July 8, 1986, at 3:00 p.m., and continuing
on Wednesday, July 9, 1986, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Guffey
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Melzer
Mr. Morris
Mr. Rice
Ms. Seger
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Bradfield, General Counsel
Oltman, 1/ Deputy General Counsel
Kichline, Economist
Truman, Economist (International)

Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis, Kohn,
Lindsey, Prell, and Siegman, Associate Economists

1/

Attended Wednesday session only.

7/8-9/86
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts, Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Loney, Economist, Office of the Staff Director for
Monetary and Financial Policy, Board of Governors
Mrs. Danker 1/and Mr. Struckmeyer, 1/ Economists, Division of
Research and Statistics, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Mr. Broaddus, Ms. Greene, Messrs. Lang, Rolnick,
Rosenblum, Scadding, Scheld, Thieke, and Ms. Tschinkel,
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks of
Richmond, New York, Philadelphia, Minneapolis, Dallas,
San Francisco, Chicago, New York, and Atlanta,
respectively
Mr. McNees, Vice President, Federal Reserve Bank
of Boston
Ms. Lovett, Assistant Vice President, Federal Reserve
Bank of New York

1/

Attended portion of meeting on Tuesday and Wednesday related to
consideration of the Committee's longer-run objectives for
monetary and debt aggregates.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
July 8-9, 1986
July 8, 1986--Afternoon Session
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
to move the minutes.
MR. GUFFEY.
MS. SEGER.

We need somebody

So moved.
Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS. GREENE.

I think we can proceed.

No objections.

Ms. Greene.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any questions or comments?

MR. MELZER. What would be the likelihood of continued
official intervention?
I think in the intermeeting period it was
Is
How would you characterize the size of that?
about
there a willingness to continue to intervene on that scale?
MS. GREENE. Well, the
figure that you cited was a
3-1/2-month total for the Bank of Japan. The purpose of the
intervention on Monday and Tuesday was to demonstrate that they feel
as strongly after the election as they did before that it is
So, I would
inappropriate [for the yen] to appreciate any more.
imagine that they would still be active in the exchange market.
Whether they would have to do the magnitudes that they have done on
certain days in the past, I don't really know.

by the]

MR. TRUMAN. That figure is more than just the [intervention
Japanese; it includes all of the industrialized countries.
MR. MELZER.

That was just for the intermeeting period?

MR. TRUMAN. That includes everybody; it includes the
Europeans--the French purchases and the Norwegian.
MR. MELZER.
Is the scale of that intervention an
extraordinary amount for the six-to-eight week period of time?
MS. GREENE.
large amount.
MR. BOEHNE.
main case, if one is
policy in Japan?

For the intermeeting period, that is a fairly
This goes beyond operations, but what is the
[speaking for] Japan, for not easing monetary

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I can recite the case.
But if you ask me
whether it's convincing at the end of the day I am never very
convinced, though the individual arguments are stated with great force
and clarity. They say consumption is rising pretty rapidly and the
discount rate is at a postwar low. That is always presented as number
one.
They say: We have reduced the discount rate three times so far
this year and it is at a postwar low; consumption is doing pretty
well; there are reasonably favorable reports about the rest of the

7/8-9/86

economy and we're happy; money supply is over the targets and the
nontarget target.
MR. BOEHNE.
MR. RICE.

What about the Germans?
What about GNP?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

That is the transitory development.

Over the year, though--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In Germany the arguments are more or less
the same.
Germany, I think, can make a much better case. There is a
lot more evidence that the economy could pick up.
They have good
investment survey figures, up above 10 percent in real terms;
consumption was strong in the first quarter; and real income was way
up and they say consumption is bound to be strong.
They had a weak
construction sector, but that's over now. They feel there is not much
they can do about monetary policy; anyway, they are above target.
MR. BOEHNE.
What is your impression of the strength of
feeling about further appreciation of either the mark or the yen in
those respective countries?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What's my feeling about the likelihood?

MR. BOEHNE.
No, what is your feeling about how strongly the
Japanese and the Germans view a further strengthening of their own
currency?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, they wouldn't like it, but relative
to easing monetary policy, I don't know. They have expressed no
eagerness to ease monetary policy. If our exchange rate got weak
enough, that would obviously be an influence but they are not going to
interpret it as another [unintelligible] this summer.
It is going
to-MR. MELZER. I have another question. You mentioned the
diminishing willingness to hold longer-term dollar-denominated
securities particularly--I believe I heard that correctly in your
remarks.
What evidence of that have we seen?
MS. GREENE.
I think what I said was that the interest
differential has narrowed to 50 basis points against Germany and 250
basis points against Japan.
I will defer to my colleague to the right
as to whether or not he has seen any-MR. THIEKE. Well, there have been less substantial inflows
than was the case around the May refunding, to be sure.
And to the
extent that there have been inflows, they have been moving in a little
shorter on the maturity curve--more into the 7- and 10-year area--in
part because of the anomalies that are still at work at the very long
end of the government yield curve.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Also, there is continuing
diversification into non-Treasury [securities], presumably in a search
for high yields.

7/8-9/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other questions or comments?
we will turn to Mr. Thieke.
MR. THIEKE.

If not,

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
In the interest of completing my answer to
Mr. Boehne, the Germans have the argument that they are low in the
EMS; they are a little less low than they were even a few days ago.
Both Germany and Japan are relatively low. They say the recent
inflation performance is just temporary and they have to guard against
the relative resurgence of inflation.
Any questions of Mr. Thieke? Any comments, observations?
If
not, we have to ratify the transactions for a period marked by
remarkable closeness to the borrowings target throughout the period.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Accidents will happen!

Messrs. Kichline, Prell, and Truman.

MESSRS. KICHLINE, PRELL, and TRUMAN.
Appendix.]

[Statements--see

MR. BOYKIN. Jim, on your $16 a barrel [price assumption for
oil], does that mean an average or the price at the end of the
forecast period?
MR. KICHLINE. To be explicit, we assumed something like $14
or $15, and it gets to about $16 by the fourth quarter of this year
and just stays there.
It creeps back up by the end of this year and
sits there.
MR. PARRY. The small decline in inventory investment in the
second quarter has a very important influence on the strength and
pattern of growth in the second half. The April numbers certainly
would support that kind of conclusion.
In terms of the production
numbers for May and what you anticipate for June and the personal
consumption expenditures for May, do you think that you might see an
even greater reduction in inventory investment than what you have in
the forecast? Would you be more optimistic?
MR. PRELL. We approached the second-quarter projections from
two sides, adding up all of the available expenditure data we could
find--and for inventories that's very limited, given that we have
[only] partial data for May in a lot of the real sectors.
On the
other side, we look at the labor input that we have. The labor input
suggests a rather slow growth, pretty much in line with our forecast.
The expenditure data are a mixed bag and we come out in the end
feeling that that's reconciled with this kind of slight moderation in
inventory investment. As we look at the industrial sector, we try to
guess what's coming in from abroad, and that's very difficult to say.
I think what is important for the outlook is that even though
automobile inventories still seem rather high, the manufacturers seem
intent on continuing to produce at a fairly high level. They have all
of the parts and they will run them out through the end of the model
year.
In other areas of the economy, manufacturers' inventories have
declined and don't seem to be a great impediment to growth. We just
feel that in the trade sector, in retail trade particularly, there is

7/8-9/86

some hint of weakness so that ordering may be a little on the slow
side there for a bit. But it shouldn't take a major correction.
MR. PARRY. But the PCE expenditures for May, at least at
some point I hope in that area [unintelligible].
MR. PRELL.

Indeed.

MR. KEEHN. Jim, I hear all the adverse comments about the
I think you said
staggered effects of the introduction of tax reform.
there was a one percent effect next year.
MR. KICHLINE.
It's one quarter of a percent on our estimate
of real GNP growth. But I should say that that comes about--and is a
lower figure, I think, than in some outside forecasts--because we
don't assume that the Senate is going to end up with $23 billion net
additional [cuts] in 1987 and that we still get all of the GrammRudman cuts.
In fact, we think there is going to be some interaction
and slippage in that process, so that by the time it comes out it
But don't
So we have a limited effect.
won't be that much of a cut.
I think your point is that concern in the business
let me interrupt.
community seems to be growing over time. Earlier on, there was a
sense of uncertainty in some sectors; but now I believe there is a
greater realization that the tax reform is going to affect the
business sector at large--assuming that it comes out something like
this Senate plan.
I
MR. KEEHN. Well, that was the point I wanted to make.
It seems to me that we have done this
also wanted to ask a question.
before: We have introduced tax legislation on a staggered basis and,
if I remember correctly, the economic effects were a little more
significant than what you are suggesting, weren't they?
MR. KICHLINE.
about 1982 or 1983?
MR. KEEHN.

Are you talking about ERTA, going back to

Yes.

MR. KICHLINE. Yes, but I think the fiscal effects were
larger. What we have done, rightly or wrongly, is come up with a
fiscal package effect that is about $7 or $8 billion more than we had
previously, as a result of some additional outlays and somewhat fewer
cuts elsewhere. And it has a depressing effect on the business
We
sector, particularly, with an assumed given rate of growth of M2.
assumed with the cutback in demand from the business sector, in
multifamily structures particularly, that there would be some interest
rate effect; rates come down a little from what we had in the last
forecast. So, you get a little more spending elsewhere, and net what
we have is something that is sprinkled through the projection. I
don't think it is an overwhelming feature, given the basic character
But if you assumed something like what happened
[of the tax reform].
in 1982, when depreciation schedules were changed as were other things
that produced a much larger fiscal impact, then it probably would have
a greater damping influence.
MR. KEEHN.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr.

Stern.

7/8-9/86

MR. STERN.
I would like to explore the other side of that a
bit.
Suppose we got substantially less restraint than you are
assuming in your forecast?
Have you done some sensitivity analysis or
something that calculates what that does to the forecast?
MR. KICHLINE.
I didn't this time.
We have done a good deal
of that in the past.
The general sense is that the models have a
great deal of difficulty handling this, as you know. And that's where
I see a little uncertainty, partly because what is built into the
current interest rate structure is expectations that something is
going to happen.
If you remove that and you get a backup in interest
rates, you get all sorts of effects that are not easy to capture--at
least in the models that we deal with. Basically, in a standard
sense, we would assume that you would have a fiscal multiplier that is
somewhat larger; how much larger is always open to question.
But if
you had federal spending that was lower by something like $20 billion,
at an annual rate, that would give you something larger than that in
terms of its impact on the economy. And $20 billion is about 1/2
percent in real GNP.
So, I think there is a lot of uncertainty here.
What is basically essential to our forecast is to assume that there
will be some fiscal restraint. However that comes about may be a very
interesting question between now and October.
MR. RICE. Mike, I think I heard you say that tax reform
would have the effect of broadening the tax base of state and local
governments. How is that?
MR. PRELL. Well, state governments in particular. Around 30
states, as I recall, have a tax form on which the state's tax rates
are applied to the same income concept as the taxable income, or
adjusted gross income, that is on one's federal tax return. With the
changes that are contemplated in personal income taxes--with fewer
deductions and so on--that number will be larger. Thus, unless the
states lower their tax rates, they will experience an increase in the
revenues they derive from income taxes.
There is already some
discussion in some states about preventing that from occurring.
But I
think as time progresses and they look at what their budgets are
dictating in terms of revenue needs, undoubtedly some of it will be
retained.
That's implicit in our forecast.
It's a minor element.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. Yes, I have a question for Mr. Truman. One of
the things that I think has had a big impact on our import demands has
been the failure of the values of currencies in Korea, Singapore, and
Taiwan to change relative to the dollar. What are you anticipating in
the forecast with regard to these areas, and what impact is that
likely to have on our import demands?
MR. TRUMAN. We have looked at that quite carefully in
putting together this forecast.
In the past we focused on the major
industrial countries' currencies because, in general, the other
currencies moved with them enough that it didn't make that much
difference. What has happened since early 1985 is that the dollar has
depreciated a lot against [the currencies of] major industrial
countries and depreciated [less] against [the currencies of] the
developing countries as a group--less so against Asian countries and
against Latin American countries, but with a big weight going in there

7/8-9/86

for Mexico. In the forecast, therefore, we have deliberately tried to
adjust that out, in terms of slowing the rate of decline that normal
models--based upon just industrial countries' currencies--would tell
us regarding how much import volume would or would not respond. We
also tried to adjust that out on the export side. It's pretty
difficult. Quite frankly, we don't have enough experience to do that.
But we have given the size of the exchange rate change against
industrial countries' currencies a lot of adjustment in the forecast,
trying to take account of this factor as well as somewhat related
issues like how fast prices change and how fast we get a response
[unintelligible].
That's one of the reasons why we get such fairly
modest numbers; you may have noticed the numbers I quoted are quite
modest [unintelligible] relative to what you might have thought.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Just a follow-up to that question: Have you
considered that the imports from these emerging industrial countries
around the Pacific Basin are really substitutable for what may not
come in from Japan and other countries against whose currencies the
dollar has moved substantially?
MR. TRUMAN. That clearly is a factor and I think we have
taken that into account. We haven't done, and I am not sure one can
do, a close analysis of the [various] imports--to the extent, for
example, that Korea is different from India in terms of what it can
produce and [unintelligible] imports. There is an offset that I think
one ought to recognize: It also is true that Korea is not going to
build up big surpluses. To the extent that it is exporting more to
the United States and the rest of the world, it also is importing
more; and to the extent that we are also exporting to the Korean
market we have a competitive advantage vis-a-vis Japan on exports,
including the amount of raw materials and that kind of thing, which is
nontrivial, that we traditionally have [unintelligible].
MR. GUFFEY.

But that beneficial effect may lag somewhat?

MR. TRUMAN. It will come later. But eventually we are going
to gain somewhat in operating in some of these Third World markets
from the fact that we have depreciated vis-a-vis Japan and Germany.
In fact, you can see the other side of what seems to be a block in
Latin America and Asia with the dollar's appreciation: As the dollar
moved up against all of those currencies we lost.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. I want to follow up on that same point too.
It's still hard for me to understand how in the forecast you can get
rising prices in the out years, both domestically and abroad, when
currencies--especially the G-10 currencies--are appreciating relative
to the dollar. I see how you can draw a scenario where prices tend to
come back a little in the United States as a result of the
appreciation of the dollar, with a lag as oil prices level off. I
still don't understand how you can get the same trend abroad with
appreciation in their currencies relative to the dollar, especially
with the fact that their currencies are appreciating even more
dramatically relative to the non G-10 currencies against which the

7/8-9/86

dollar is also appreciating.
scenario.

So,

I am having a rough time with that

MR. TRUMAN. The response is that for the G-10 countries as a
whole the difference between QIV inflation rates is 2.7 percent versus
2.9 percent.
Now, the chart here is a little exaggerated because the
higher inflation countries continue to go the other way and are left
out of the chart.
Switzerland, for example, goes down next year and
is left out; [unintelligible] is left out of here. So you have a very
small effect and that is coming from the fact that oil prices stop
going down and the exchange rate--although the dollar continues to
depreciate, it's not at a 30 percent annual rate.
MR. JOHNSON.

10 percent.

MR. TRUMAN. It is something like an 8 percent annual rate,
so that is what [unintelligible].
I don't-MR. JOHNSON.
other way.

It still seems to me that it would be going the

MR. TRUMAN.
I have quoted you the wrong set of numbers--the
GNP numbers.
It goes up, but one of the points is that for the G-10
as a whole--Sweden is at 4 percent this year and goes down and Belgium
comes in a little high relative to Europe, going up about 0.3 percent
--it's a relatively small average drop.
You have a bigger effect in
Japan and Germany partly because those currencies have moved a lot and
the move was relatively large compared to the other currencies.
The
only point I would make is that the change is small relative to the
change in the United States; [the numbers are] 2.1 and 2.9 percent in
the G-10 [versus 1.4] and 3.9 percent in the United States.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. TRUMAN.
important.

I agree.

I just don't--

It's the relative change that I think is more

MR. JOHNSON. It's small, but I don't even understand the
direction. I was checking.
MR. TRUMAN.
are other factors.

Well, wages are continuing to go up and there

MR. PARRY.
Isn't the impact of energy price developments
even greater for them because it's a multiplier-MR. TRUMAN. You are multiplying--halving the dollar price of
oil and that times a 30 percent drop in the price of the dollar
[unintelligible].
MR. JOHNSON. Maybe we ought to start over.
oil prices leveled out in this-MR. TRUMAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

I thought that

Yes.
And then against depreciating currencies--

7/8-9/86

MR. TRUMAN. But say that oil prices go down by 8 percent or
greater, say, 10 percent. Last year they had gone down about 50 or 60
percent.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

But they are going down.
Yes, but other prices are going up.
Above?

MR. PARRY. There is less of an offset to the higher
increases in other components in 1987 than in 1986 and that can do it.
MR. TRUMAN.
But the year-over-year consumer inflation rates
in these countries are still positive and you can ask the same
It has to do with
question even with price effects [unintelligible].
the other components in the price index.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

I
MS. SEGER. I have another dollar question for Mr. Truman.
have heard business people say that comparing the current value of the
dollar to the absolute high back in February of 1985 tends to
overstate the amount of the decline in terms of how they benefit from
it.
They say it is better to look at something like the current level
versus, say, the average for 1984 or the average for 1985 because they
point out that they didn't do a lot of transactions at the exact peak
So this comparison we use overstates the amount of the
of the dollar.
deterioration and suggests more of an improvement than they, in fact,
would be likely to get.
[Unintelligible] I would agree with that. What
MR. TRUMAN.
transactions took place were [unintelligible] response to what was
That's one of the reasons for
going on as the dollar was moving up.
You count the negative effects on
the continuation of the effect.
export and import volume as they lag through the system; at the same
time, you begin to add on the positive impact and we don't begin to
get much positive impact for a while. Look at it the other way: The
dollar started depreciating on this particular index from, call it 90
So it has gone
in the fourth quarter of 1980, and it is now at 110.
from 90 to 150 plus back down to 110; that suggests that there is a
It's debatable
lot of appreciation that has not been wiped out.
whether it needs to be wiped out completely anyhow, but it is clear
that the dollar has still appreciated relative to what was on average
the last [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

A lot of appreciation against the Canadian

dollar.
MR. TRUMAN.

[Unintelligible]

never appreciate that much.

MS. SEGER. Also, I couldn't hear Mr. Kichline's comment.
How much of a downward revision did you say we had made in our
collective forecast for real GNP in 1986?
MR. KICHLINE.

In 1986?

Are you referring to the last chart?

7/8-9/86

MS. SEGER.
You have a summary of forecasts--I think it's
chart 19 or something like that--where you show forecasts for real GNP
Sitting this far away, I
of Board members, presidents, and staff.
thought I heard you say something about the downward revision.
MR. KICHLINE.
I simply stated that nominal GNP now for 1986
I was trying to
falls below the lower range of the central tendency.
suggest that there has been a sizable downward revision both with
respect to the deflator and real GNP.
MS.

SEGER.

Okay.

Thank you.

MR. BLACK.
Jim, isn't that a typographical error on that
Shouldn't it be "FOMC projections for 1986" instead of 1985?
chart?
We are bad [forecasters] if it was for 1985 and we missed it that
much!
This is a result of trying
[You are right.]
MR. KICHLINE.
to be cost conscious and using an old chart.
Well, Bob,
MR. ANGELL.
one way to look at it.
MR. BLACK.

That's

it may be worse than you did!

That's

a thought!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Well, you have assaulted the staff with a
I haven't heard anybody committing themselves to the
few questions.
I don't know whether we want to do that after
outlook at this point.
Why don't we put the long-run ranges
we look at the long-run ranges.
on the table?
Mr. Kohn.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Thank you, Mr.

Chairman.

[Statement--see

Don, I might ask a question that was triggered
MR. MELZER.
You used the phrase a couple of times "should
by your statement.
Maybe this is a question for Jim,
interest rates need to decline."
too.
How would that be treated in the model?
Would one be able to
There has been talk, for
control interest rates that effectively?
example, of highly stimulated interest-sensitive sectors of the
economy.
How would a 50 or 100 basis point decline in interest rates
affect GNP for 1987, for example, all things being equal?
MR. KOHN.
Well, I think Jim can answer that, but let me say
that my comments were really meant in the sense that our GNP forecast
is considered consistent, as Jim and Mike both said, with rates
remaining around current levels.
I was trying to deal with the
contingency that underlying demands were weak so that, in order to
attain an acceptable rate of GNP growth, interest rates would have to
fall; and GNP growth would be not stronger than we are projecting but
around the rate that we are projecting.
MR. KICHLINE.
We have done some simulations; we didn't do
the fiscal one, but we have done some monetary ones, basically using
M2.
And in this particular simulation, if M2 were running at the top
of the range--if M2 grew at 9 percent through 1988 beginning now--the
model result is that that would be consistent roughly with a federal
funds rate 3/4 percentage below what it is now, with that sort of

7/8-9/86

You would get just a few tenths more real
level maintained into 1988.
growth this year because of the lags but about a percentage point more
On the price side with
real growth next year and a bit more in 1988.
that sort of scenario, prices don't change this year; they are up a
quarter to one-half of a percentage point more in 1987 and, according
to the model, up 1-1/4 percentage points over what they otherwise
would have been in 1988.
[Unintelligible] the usefulness of the
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
model. Does anybody have any particular questions for Mr. Kohn?
Have
we covered every contingency?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Don, in the first paragraph in the
Bluebook, you talk about the combination of factors that may be
influencing Ml: lower interest rates on the one hand, and then a kind
I don't want to hear a model answer; I
of potpourri of other things.
want a judgmental answer. How much weight would you give to the
interest rate factor in and of itself as opposed to the potpourri of
everything else?
MR. KOHN. I think the interest rate factor accounts for the
bulk of the acceleration. I think we are getting more of an interest
rate response than the models would indicate and in large measure that
is coming in the demand deposit component. A higher proportion of
demand deposits is in compensating balances because some of the
The
household deposits are out; they were shifted into OCDs.
In
compensating balance responses to interest rates are very large.
essence, it's one for one--an elasticity of one there. At the same
time, our investigation of some of the activity in the secondary
markets--in mortgage markets in particular--shows that a considerable
amount of demand deposits can be generated through refinancing,
through the use of cashier's checks, and the advance repayments of
Ginnie Mae's being put temporarily in demand balances before being
I hesitate to
paid out and passed through to security holders.
quantify it; I don't think we can.
But I do think that some
substantial portion of the demand deposit group in particular is
related to this huge pick up in financial activity, particularly in
the mortgage market. And our projection of a slowing of money growth
over the second half of the year is predicated partly on the wearing
out of these interest rate effects. But it is also predicated partly
on the presumption that with a more stable interest rate environment
the volume of mortgage refinancings will tend to taper off as will
some of the other financial market activity. And that would help to
bring down demand deposits or at least to level them off.
MR. MORRIS.
Mr. Chairman, I remember that we went to
controlling monetary aggregates very recently because we didn't know
how to forecast what level of interest rates would be needed to get
the nominal GNP growth that we sought. Now I think we have come full
circle because, as I hear Don tell it, in order to set a range for Ml
If that is the case,
we have to forecast interest rates for the year.
that raises a question in my mind whether it makes any sense for us to
set a range for M1 when we don't know what interest rates are going to
be in the coming year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Mr. Morris, M1 emphasis led us away from
That gets to the question
[unintelligible] so we can go back to it.
that I was going to raise. Maybe we can, if not resolve it, at least

7/8-9/86

-11-

begin to form some consensus on what we want to do with M1 in these
long-range targets.
I am not so worried about what precisely the
target should be if we have a target, but whether we should have one
or rebase it.
Do we chose a new target for this year?
Do we have one
for next year?
Do we rebase this year, do we keep what we have, or do
we say we are going to be over it and eliminate what we have?
Of the
various choices Mr. Kohn gave you, what appeals?
MR. JOHNSON.
I kind of agree with Frank. I don't think we
really know how to set a target at this point for the rest of the
year. A lot is going to depend on interest rates and we are not sure
what is going to happen.
I think that we ought to emphasize M2 and
I think we would be better
M3, which is sort of what we have done.
off not setting a new target for [Ml] and playing Ml down while
emphasizing M2 and M3.
I think that makes a little more sense.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
do for 1987?

You are talking about 1986?

What do you

A lot would depend, I think, on
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, 1986.
what we see in the demand for money by the end of the year. But of
course, we have to set a target now. We could make-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have to set a target for something; we
don't necessarily have to do it for Ml.
MR. JOHNSON. I would shy away even from 1987 at this point,
saying that we might come back to it if we see velocity stabilize at
some point.
MR. RICE. I would hate to see us drop the target range for
Ml.
I would much rather see us retain a target range but announce
that we don't expect the growth to be within that range.
This way we
would be facing up to the fact that-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You say just keep 3 to 8 percent this year
and say we are not going to be within it?
MR. JOHNSON. Well, that is what I said.
I didn't say drop
the target; I said maybe not announce targets for 1987 this year--not
until we have a better look at what velocity is doing for 1987.
MR. RICE.
I would have no problem dropping it for 1987.
It
would be easier to drop it for 1987 than for 1986.
I would prefer at
this time to keep 3 to 8 percent for 1987 too and change it later.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, that is the same.

I don't mind.

MR. RICE. But I would go along with dropping it for 1987, if
there is a consensus.
MR. WALLICH.
too low is another.

Having it too high is one thing; but having it

MR. MORRIS.
What is the value of having the range and then
announcing that we are not going to be within it?

7/8-9/86

MR. RICE.
I think it conveys a sense of honesty.
We are
telling the public what we think the range ought to be.
Then we are
telling them that for reasons that are not altogether fully apparent,
It is more honest to do it
we are not going to make the target range.
that way.
MR. MORRIS.
Wouldn't it be more honest to say that the
relationship between M1 and nominal GNP has become so unpredictable
that we are dropping it as a target rather than say we have a range
but we don't intend to stay within it?
MR. JOHNSON.
I think there is some information in M1
What we have seen is a runoff in bank CDs into
relative to M2 and M3.
Ml--to some extent a shift in savings from less liquid to more liquid
I would be much
form--and I think it is important to monitor that.
more concerned about M1 if it were rising and M2 and M3 also started
moving.
It has some relative significance, but I don't know right now
whether we could set a target and make any sense out of it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. I am afraid I won't do much more than join the
It seems to me that it is
discussions that have already taken place.
honest to say, first of all, that M1 has [served us] quite well in the
past and perhaps will come back full circle to where there will be a
restoration of some historical relationship between income and money
growth and we will want an M1 target again. As a result, I would
prefer not to drop it but rather, as Emmett said, to be more honest
and say we'll have a range for it but expect not to hit that range in
1986--and I should think in 1987 also, unless there is a return to
some historical relationship. The Bluebook has the language that I
think would be appropriate.
It says that M1 [would be evaluated]
depending on "developments in the economy and financial markets, and
That is the kind of explanation,
potential inflationary pressures."
it seems to me, that would be appropriate after we have said we don't
Therefore, I would opt to retain
understand what has happened to M1.
the 3 to 8 percent range for 1986 and also for 1987, with the
explanation. We'll have another opportunity to look at it in
February.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. I am in favor of dropping the range for Ml--in
We don't intend to meet it and we don't really
particular for 1987.
know-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You said particularly for 1987?

MS. HORN. Yes, I favor not announcing a range for M1 for
1987.
As to how we handle 1986, I also favor not having a range.
Whether we do that by actually eliminating the range we have already
set or by saying that it was set and we are not going to come within
it, I don't feel too strongly one way or another as long as we don't
I think it communicates that for the
announce a range for 1987.
moment we have to step away from this.
As you can imagine, I also
have great hopes that we will come back to it one day.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

7/8-9/86

MR. BLACK. I reach a rather different conclusion, Mr.
Chairman.
I think Don Kohn set a very good stage when he said the
real question was not what we do with M2 and M3 but what we do with
Ml.
Even someone who has thought, as I have, that M1 has been so
important has to admit that it has been behaving very strangely.
So,
I think it does deserve somewhat special treatment at this point; but
I think it would be a decided mistake to downgrade it completely,
since it is the aggregate that we can control better than any other.
If we downgrade it, then that might jeopardize--and certainly would be
perceived by a large part of the market as jeopardizing--our chances
of attaining our long-run objective of permanently restoring price
stability.
I think we have to recognize that [prospective role] at
some point--that is, after the more normal relationship is reestablished between M1 and the economy. With interest rates having
fallen the way they have, and with the general expectation that there
won't be a great deal of movement in the last half, I think we might
be at the point where we begin to see those relationships resuming in
some form or another.
So if you buy that part, that gets to the
question of whether to take these wider ranges beginning from the
first of the year or whether to rebase. As they are set up in the
Bluebook, it really doesn't make a whole lot of difference so far as
the end point is concerned, because rebasing from 3 to 8 percent
results in a growth rate of 10.2 percent above the fourth quarter of
1985 which would be sort of in the middle of these two alternatives-raising the ranges or rebasing back on the fourth quarter of last
year.
But to me it would be much more logical to rebase, because my
guess is that this unanticipated further substantial decline in the
velocity of M1 in the first half of the year was due largely to this
sharp decline in interest rates; and since we don't expect that to
continue, to me it would make sense to sort of forgive that and
rebase. But a second and more practical reason to rebase is that if
we are going to move this range down over time, it is going to be a
lot easier--from a public relations standpoint--to move it down to
something that eventually is compatible to price stability if we come
down from a rebased 3 to 8 percent than if we had 5 to 9 percent or 5
to 10 percent and then suddenly said next year we want 3 to 8 percent
or whatever it is we decide on.
I would definitely rebase, and I
think 3 to 8 percent might be a good place to put the range.
And I
would hope that in 1987 we could move it down somewhat from that
point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. I would be strongly against rebasing and also
against changing the range.
It seems to me that basically we have all
concluded that we don't know very much about the relationship between
money and economic activity in the last 18 months, but more
importantly, that we don't have much confidence that we will know all
that much more in the future.
Consequently, it seems to me that the
most honest thing to do is to leave the range for Ml where it is and
simply indicate, as is shown in the proposed language of variant I,
that for 1986 we are leaving the range at 3 to 8 percent but we are
not going to pay a great deal of attention to it.
As far as 1987 is
concerned, it seems to me that if you buy that--particularly if you
buy the idea that we are not confident of knowing what kind of
relationship will exist between economic activity and money in 1987,
then the choice is really an obvious one, and that is: Don't set a
range. Because if we set a range--be it a range from a changed base

-14-

7/8-9/86

or whatever--it implies that we have some degree of confidence about a
reassertion of a predictable relationship between money and economic
activity. And I don't have that confidence.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. As far as the balance of 1986 is
concerned, I would couch M1 in terms of a monitoring range as we have
used that term in the past.
In that setting, I would probably have a
mild disposition to have what I would call a realistic range for the
year, not rebasing it.
But I could leave it at 3 to 8 percent too.
I
prefer a monitoring range with a realistic range.
I come out rather
differently in terms of 1987.
I would prefer to have a target for
1987 and I would couch the language for the M1 target for 1987 in
terms of suggesting that that range is based on the assumption of a
return to a more normal velocity relationship. And if that were not
to materialize, I would demote it in February back to a monitoring
range.
I have no strong theoretical persuasions about Ml or any M,
but I am inclined to the view that, as sure as we sit here, the day
will come when we are going to want to have Ml.
And if we completely
discredit it to the point where nobody pays any attention to it, it is
simply not going to be possible to resurrect it when it suits our
purpose.
So, I think we need some continuity there, but I would be
quite flexible as to how to achieve it; certainly, for the balance of
this year a monitoring range is fine.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, for 1986, I certainly would not like to
see us revise the range because doing that would imply a sense of
confidence in what we think Ml should be later on in the year and I
don't think we have enough information, given the recent behavior of
Ml, to have that kind of confidence.
By the same token, I wouldn't
like to see us rebase because by rebasing we, in effect, would be
forgiving the growth of M1 that has taken place already.
That, too,
implies that growth in Ml was due to a one-time phenomenon that is now
going to be corrected. So, I think that rebasing or revising is not
the way to go.
Nor would I think it desirable, given the history of
M1 over the past several quarters, to announce a range and then say we
are not going to pay any attention to it--that we are going to overrun
the range for the rest of the year.
So, I think the better course of
action is to put this M1 aggregate on a monitoring basis.
Now, maybe
this is a matter of semantics. But some people have talked about
dropping M1 and dropping M1 means discrediting the aggregate and
saying that it is over and done with--that we probably are not even
going to look at it and we are not going to assimilate the information
that it gives us.
I think that would be a mistake and I would not
like us to do that.
I would like us to do what we did about a year
ago and that is to have it on a monitoring range, observe it, and take
whatever information it has but not set a range for it.
I take it
that we don't have to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
without setting--?

How can you have a monitoring range

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, setting target numbers.
I don't think
we have to set a public target for M1 if it is a monitoring range.
In
any event, I don't think it ought to be a target in the sense that we

7/8-9/86

-15-

have had it up until now. I'd put it on a pure monitoring basis for
1986 and I would be inclined to wait for 1987 and not do anything
about 1987 at the moment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, I agree with the point that it is very
difficult, given Ml's recent performance, to come up with a range in
which I would have much confidence.
But having said that, I think we
would be well advised at this juncture at least to consider
establishing a range that we have some chance of hitting for this
year, albeit perhaps a slim chance. In some sense, I think our
credibility is a bit at stake if we continually run with something
like 3 to 8 percent and then acknowledge as quickly as we say that,
that of course we are not going to hit it.
That leads me to some
thoughts along the lines of alternative I or II, as expressed in the
Bluebook, for the balance of this year. We obviously can achieve the
same thing with rebasing; I am indifferent as to whether we do it
through rebasing or simply by establishing a new range that we have
some possibility of hitting. Obviously, alternative II is probably
somewhat more likely in that regard.
One of the other advantages of
doing that is that as we look ahead to 1987, if we establish a revised
M1 range consistent with alternative II, which was 6 to 11 percent, we
could at the same time consider a somewhat lower range for next year
with all the caveats that have been appearing in our directives and in
our ranges for several years--well, for at least more than a year now.
In my mind, that would at least be a signal and demonstrate our intent
to work toward price stability over time. So, I would favor something
like 6 to 11 percent for the balance of this year, with something
lower next year for the purpose of moving in the direction that I
think we ultimately want to go.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't want to get into just what the
range should be at this point, assuming we have one.
Governor Angell.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that a midyear change in the
range would make more important what we do not want to make more
important.
The markets have already understood very well; they
haven't had to have any guidance from us that we are permitting Ml to
grow faster than the 3 to 8 percent range.
So I think the less said,
the better. Leave 1986 as it is.
I would strongly endorse Mr.
Corrigan's position that at some point in time--when, we do not know-inflation might once again return. You understand I say "return."
And if it were to return, then velocity would behave in a manner
consistent with those periods when inflation was a factor and it would
be very important for us to have the M1 tool ready to go.
My
particular preference would be for 1987--well, you don't want to talk
about percentages. But I do think it is important for us to have Ml
in there. I don't think we need-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

You can make a vague statement about that.

MR. ANGELL. Well, my vague statement would be that I would
prefer for 1987 what you may remember I preferred for 1986: a 3 to 10
percent range because we do not know at this point in time how
velocity is going to behave in the deflationary environment that we
are in.

7/8-9/86

-16-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, it seems to me that the
immediate problem is probably more one of form than of substance. We
talk about honesty, and I guess that's in the eyes of the beholder.
I
would think that would be a straightforward change in the range--not
dropping it and not rebasing it--to the money growth we would
anticipate, much as Gary said.
I would just do a straightforward
change in the range at this point and say this is what we anticipate
M1 will do--without having to say that it's a monitoring range or that
we don't know what it's doing or that we are not going to be paying
The numbers might look a little large-very much attention to it.
larger than we are used to seeing--but I would be pretty
straightforward on that.
For 1987, I would keep Ml; there again I
would be inclined to make the best judgment we could about what money
growth numbers we anticipate, and I would construct the ranges around
them.
Again, they might be a little large, but I would do that here
at midyear, because before we have to really settle on that early next
year we would have the opportunity--if more normal relationships
develop--to make an adjustment downward.
I would rather go to the up
side now and come down [later] rather than shoot low and have to go
over.
Those are good economic terms!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.
Well, I wouldn't change the range for 1986 or for
1987, nor would I rebase for 1986, because I think for all the
statements that we could make, I would have very little confidence in
But I wouldn't drop the
any range or any base that we might choose.
I would think of the two periods
aggregate either for 1986 or 1987.
as a continuum; I would leave the target where it is for this year and
reestablish the range at the same level for next year, but make it
perfectly clear that we might expect the results to be at very
considerable variance with the target, and that in the interim period
I think [Jerry] made an
we are placing our emphasis on M2 and M3.
important point: that at some point these relationships are likely to
come back into line and that we are going to want to reuse Ml when we
have the confidence that those relationships have been reestablished.
If we keep it in the menu, I think it would be easier to accomplish
that than if we drop it at this point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor

Seger.

MS. SEGER.
I really think our credibility with financial
market participants would be enhanced by admitting what is obvious:
that we don't know what is going on with M1 and we can't really
explain it.
The relationship between monetary growth, as measured by
M1, and economic activity has certainly broken down.
Therefore, we
are better off not coming up with a quantitative range because
regardless of what we call it--a monitoring range or something else-the Fed watchers still look at the numbers and they still plot and
compare actual Ml figures to whatever range we have mentioned.
Also,
the media pick these numbers up and do the comparison regardless of
our warnings about how risky it is to make something out of it.
They
still do.
I think we would be better off dropping it--maybe
"dropping" isn't the proper term; maybe "putting it on ice" or
something like that would be the terminology to use.
I think we are

7/8-9/86

just misleading people when we keep a numerical range for either 1986
or 1987.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I have gone back and forth in my thinking about
In
this.
I wanted to hear some of the discussion here today.
general, I think it's very important that we have a narrow aggregate
like Ml.
And I guess Ml is the best one we have right now because of
the control characteristics and historically, anyway, the relationship
to GNP.
Now, whether any of the work going on to come up with a
better narrow aggregate will pay off and we will come up with such an
aggregate, I don't know. But for the reasons Governor Angell and
President Corrigan cited, I would favor an approach that maintains the
credibility of M1 down the road should we need it.
One thing that
concerns me about either rebasing or increasing the growth ranges at
this juncture would be the implications that might be read into that
in terms of how policy would be conducted in the second half.
If
somebody tore it apart and said: "Well, 6 to 11 percent looks like a
pretty broad range but that implies month-to-month money growth from
June to December of less than 8 percent" we conceivably could be
sending a signal of tightening at a time when I don't think we want to
do that.
I think, politically, too many people are trying to jump on
us right now in terms of policy, and [adopting] that range might
increase that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just so I get it clear in my mind, is it
literally true that 6 to 11 percent implies 8 percent from now on?
MR. KOHN.
June to December.

Eleven percent implies just about 8 percent from

MR. MELZER.
In any case, whether it is established as a
monitoring range or whatever, I think there is potentially a problem
in terms of resetting the range at this juncture that could really
affect the credibility of this aggregate down the road.
In other
words, we should only reset the target if we pretty much rededicate
ourselves to trying to meet that target.
I don't think that we have a
credibility problem with markets right now in terms of Ml; I think
they know we have been treating Ml differently.
If we were just to
say that we are not going to meet the target and put it on a
monitoring range through the balance of this year, that would not
create a problem. I would agree with what Jerry said that we ought to
have targets for next year.
I think that's important.
We could see
circumstances where we will need the rationale to support a firming in
monetary policy and that likely would provide it.
So, I would like to
get from here to there maintaining as much credibility as we can for
the Ml aggregate or a narrow aggregate that might take its place.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Wallich.

MR. WALLICH. I think the behavior of M1 is still going to be
so [uncertain] that the main issue is whether it is a viable target,
regardless of whether or not its growth is going to be very strong.
[Unintelligible.]
So I would argue, not to trust too much in what we
can do in terms of the M1 numbers, but to in effect [monitor it].
[Unintelligible].

7/8-9/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

With regard to
I have two additional comments.
MR. PARRY.
1986, I would be reluctant to support either alternative I or II
because I don't have much confidence that they could be reached,
particularly if for some reason we felt that a somewhat more
The
accommodative policy would be appropriate in the shorter term.
I agree with Jerry that
second point relates to a comment Jerry made.
But please keep
we should have a target for M1 to operate on in 1987.
in mind that this is July of 1986, and what we basically could be
saying is that we are not specifying a target in July because we do
One could certainly address that issue
not have enough information.
for 1987 at the beginning of December, if one wanted to, for
operational purposes.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It's not quite relevant, but I would
We
remind people that once we tried to do that with all the targets.
said: We aren't quite ready; we'll set them at the end of the year.
But
And Mr. Proxmire sent us back, threatening us with a legal suit.
I don't think that's relevant, really, in terms of just one of the
Do you have anything to say, Mr. Boehne?
aggregates.
Well, I must confess that I find this to be one
MR. BOEHNE.
of the lesser issues of our times, so I haven't been able to generate
I think I would come down on
strong feelings one way or the other.
the side of keeping the 3 to 8 percent target--but, in effect,
suspending it--on the grounds that it might be useful at some point.
I would also keep it for 1987, but surround it with as many caveats as
I could conceive of.
Mr. Morris, you are against anything
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
You would say drop it and bury it?
[relating to] Ml.
I
My position is very simple, Mr. Chairman.
MR. MORRIS.
don't think we can measure money in the old transactions balance sense
in the United States.
I don't think that we are going to be able to
I
do it next year or the year after that or the year after that.
think it is nostalgia that is reflected in all of these comments about
M1 returning to its historical relationships; the probability of that,
It
given the changed character of Ml, has got to be extremely low.
seems to me that at some point we ought to say we can't measure money
in the old sense because of all of the institutional changes that have
taken place and, therefore, we are going to use liquid assets instead
I would have M2 and M3 and, since we always
of money as a target.
have three targets, I would add total liquid assets.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Whose growth is very low this year.

I know it; and it's not incompatible with what's
MR. MORRIS.
It has been decelerating since midgoing on in the economy either.
1984; and if you look at the rate of growth in nominal GNP, that has
been decelerating too.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
been rising like crazy.
MR. MORRIS.

So was debt

a few years

ago and that has

I think I tried to unsell debt some time ago.

7/8-9/86

MR. BLACK.
It's not necessarily the old relationships that
I think the
would have to re-emerge but predictable relationships.
trend of velocity is going to be lower in the future than it has been
in the past.
MR. MORRIS. We will need a predictable relationship for an
extended period of time. You don't take one six-month period of
experience or a year's experience and get predictable relationships.
MR. BLACK.

I agree with that.

MR. JOHNSON. We really need some time series on how much in
NOW accounts are people's savings.
MR. BLACK. We need a lot of future information so we would
That's really what it comes down to.
know what to do next year too.
I don't think we have to have the whole relationship resumed but we
have to have predictable relationships if we are going to use any kind
of monetary target. But the alternative, which you posed very well a
while ago, Frank, is choosing a level of interest rates, unless we do
something like Chairman Volcker once suggested when I made a similar
But basically in a
assertion that we can stabilize the exchange rate.
country like this, we have two choices: use some aggregate or pick the
appropriate level of interest rates. And the question, I think, is on
which path we'll make the smallest mistakes.
MR. ANGELL.
both of them.

We're probably going to make big mistakes on

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Or commodity prices or something.

MR. MORRIS. Well, I think the biggest mistake we could have
I think we
made would have been to follow Ml the last 4 or 5 years.
would have set this country right on its ear.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think there is some disagreement
about how much weight we want to retain on M1 for some indefinite
future period that we don't quite know about.
I don't know how to
resolve that problem. I suspect it's unresolvable in the sense of
getting agreement among the members.
I have a little logical
difficulty with a monitoring range regarding what it means or at least
whether we really want to do it.
If we establish a monitoring range
that means anything, we've got to establish a new target.
I think what most people mean is that we
MR. JOHNSON.
monitor it but not really set a range.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm really addressing it to the only
persons, at least on this Committee, who said set a new range. When
you come up against Mr. Melzer and Mr. Parry, the problem is: How do
you know what you want to set?
MR. PARRY. If you talk about language for 1986, variant I
doesn't use the term "monitoring" but accomplishes it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. PARRY.

We could change--

I think it's nice without it.

7/8-9/86

-20-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We could write down a new range and say
this is now a monitoring range.
I don't know what we would say.
MR. RICE.
monitoring range.

We could keep the present range and say it's a

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, except that the present range is a
monitoring range. We are monitoring how far outside the range we are
now. It seems a little strange.
1983,

MR. FORRESTAL.
I think it was.

We used that term "monitoring" in 1982 or

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORRESTAL.
target at that time?

But we had a range.

Did we?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

That was my question.

Did we set a

Sure, we did.

MR. JOHNSON. We could keep the 3 to 8 percent, but
[unintelligible] July.
MR. MORRIS.
I think Manley's idea is the right one. We
should say we are going to monitor M1 and we are going to monitor
debt, but we are not going to set ranges for either of them. We are
not going to set any monitoring ranges.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. All I am trying to think about is how we
In the wording we can say all sorts of things; but
should word it.
how operational it is, I don't know.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
have meant in the past.

That is not what monitoring ranges

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. With a monitoring aggregate in the past,
we have had a range. There's no doubt about it.
MR. MORRIS. What I am suggesting is that we say we think we
may be able to learn something from the M1 data and from the debt data
and we are going to continue to monitor that data but we are not going
to set a monitoring range.
MR. PARRY. Doesn't the language of that first variant get us
out of some of these problems?
It doesn't use the word "monitor" but
it says on the second page on page 21 [of the Bluebook]: "In light of
the uncertainties and of the substantial decline in velocity in the
first half of the year, the Committee decided that growth of M1 in
excess of the previously established 3 to 8 percent range for 1986
could be acceptable, depending upon the behavior of" etc.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

of."

What page are you on?

MR. PARRY. Page 21,
This is variant I.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

the second line beginning with "In light

I think we would say something like that.

7/8-9/86

MR. PARRY.
"monitor."

And that gets away from having to use the word

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, the great majority of the Committee

members-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. PARRY.

But we would have a number, just--

Oh yes, for 1986--the one we established in

February.
MR. JOHNSON.

I would change "could be" to "is."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We don't need

[precise]

language now.

MR. BLACK.
It seems to me that whatever numbers we put in
there ought to be predicated in part on what we think we are likely to
If you think we are likely to want a lot of growth in
want next year.
money then 5 to 10 percent makes more sense; but if you think by next
year a lower figure would make more sense, then the rebasing argument
comes into play.
Then it comes down to 3 to 8 percent or 3 to 7
percent or whatever we might decide looks more logical from a public
relations standpoint.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, just summarizing the discussion, a
great majority of the Committee members want some variant but don't
want to horse around with it--just admit we are running over it for
this year. The majority of the non-Committee members want to do the
same thing. So, unless people have any great changes of heart I think
we are someplace in that neighborhood. We don't need to decide this
issue right now, but that is where we are unless there are great
changes of heart tomorrow. Unless somebody gets persuasive with a
It's
gold tongue, we're much more evenly divided regarding next year.
pretty evenly divided; I'm not being too precise about it.
I don't
think these are the most crucial issues; I agree with Mr. Boehne on
that.
I presume the choice is that we either say we don't know right
now and we may or may not have a range by the time we get to the end
of the year and have to decide, or we write a figure down--I would
presume something like this year's--and say we'll decide at the end of
the year whether we really need it or not because we are not at all
sure that we mean it.
And there isn't an enormous amount of
difference between those two choices.
MR. BOEHNE.

Which one do you feel more comfortable uttering?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think I probably would feel slightly
more comfortable saying we'll get around to it at the end of the year,
but I am not sure it makes a lot of difference.
The only loss in
doing that, and I don't think this is an enormous issue so long as we
get the right language, is how easy it is to return to it if we want
to.
Clearly, it's pretty simple to return to it at the end of the
year, if we really want to at that point.
If we don't want to then,
and we stated the range earlier, it isn't going to help much. I don't
think the difference is all that enormous.
MR. RICE. Do you think the difference is of any significance
for public understanding of what we are doing?

-22-

7/8-9/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I presume if we didn't have a
target, we would say: We are not crazy about being over it now, but we
think we half understand and half don't understand it; and if M1
continues to run high and these other [aggregates] are running high we
anticipate that we would get worried about it. We would look at it
and take it into account, but we don't have any particular number in
mind. If it was running high in connection with the others that would
be of some significance to us. Next year we would like to see it a
lot lower, but we are not ready to commit ourselves at this point.
MR. BOEHNE. I would urge my colleagues around the table to
rally behind the Chairman.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Given that you [don't] think it's an
enormous point, I think that's about where we are at the moment. We
will start tomorrow with the business outlook, which we haven't really
dealt with, and then return to the long-term ranges in an operational
sense. But I would hope not to linger too much over this M1 issue and
be able to dispose of that in something like five minutes tomorrow.
With the background of this discussion, I think that's roughly where
So, unless somebody wants to be very persuasive
the weight lies.
tomorrow and feels very strongly-MR. GUFFEY. May I ask for an explanation of the discussion
that you just had with yourself with respect to 1986 and 1987 with
regard specifically to the use of the term "monitoring range"?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. In that discussion I don't think I used
the term "monitoring range" because we wouldn't have a range. We
would say "monitor."
MR. GUFFEY.

That's all I wanted to know.

SPEAKER(?).

9:30 a.m. tomorrow?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we make it
have plenty of things to discuss before we go up
we can start at 9:00 a.m. if you want to. Let's
had some crazy thought to say about this, but it

9:15 a.m. because we
to that lunch. Or,
start at 9:00 a.m. I
has escaped me.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just to pick up on what you did say:
The logic of what you are saying is that if we don't have a monitoring
range, at least in an historical context, M1 is less important than
debt because with debt we have always had a range.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I guess I would respond to that in
I don't think it really is
some logical sense that may be correct.
correct. I think I am more certain even about the appropriate course
for Ml right now than I am for debt. I do get worried about debt
rising substantially faster than the GNP, I guess; I might not do
anything about it but it doesn't seem to me right in the long run. I
am not sure that one can say that about M1 in the very long run. For
1986 and 1987, I am not sure I can say it. I think something is the
matter with debt rising as fast as it is. I am not sure that
something is the matter with Ml rising as fast as it is for this
limited period of time. Sure, if it grows that fast for five years,
we would be in trouble. But if we are in some kind of transition to a
new world, maybe M1 relative to GNP is still very low historically.

-23-

7/8-9/86

Debt is very high historically. That is suggesting that we [should
be] more worried about the level of debt than about the level of Ml in
some sustainable sense.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
"relative"--

I am not sure I quite follow that

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it's statistically true, I think.
When you look at the levels, it's statistically correct.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. But in the historical context that
we use these things, wouldn't you say it's also true that-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Growth in] M1 is very rapid relative to
that of GNP for this period in time. There's no doubt about that,
historically. They are both equally out of line in terms of the yearto-year growth path.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
range for both.

So treat them equally and have a

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are going to get your two minutes to
[expound to] everybody in a much longer discussion tomorrow. You can
be really persuasive, but I guess you are going to have to convince
people that they may not want to swear by your new range but monitor
by it.
Suppose you made the range the numbers the staff has here.
What are they: 6 to 11 percent or something?
MR. ANGELL.

No, 3 to 10 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you are talking about next year; I
am talking about this year.
Suppose you made it 6 to 11 percent?
Does that make you feel more comfortable than some other figure in
terms of--?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, it makes me feel more
comfortable only in the sense that we might run into the situation
that you yourself described, where the economic situation was
different from the one we are looking at right now and Ml was growing
at 15 percent and M3 and M2 were at 9 percent.
If we didn't have any
kind of a quantitative range for M1, I don't see how we could bring it
to bear in a policy context. But at least if we had some kind of a
quantitative range, it seems to me more credible that it would
manifest itself in those circumstances.
MR. ANGELL.

Are you arguing for 1987?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, for any period.
I don't think
it matters in a literal sense in the near term--certainly not the
[next] 12 months or so.
But I just have this nagging feeling-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'll give you one to go home and think
about overnight.
Suppose the economy was moving more rapidly than all
of these projections, and everybody was feeling much more buoyant, and
maybe M2 and M3 were a little high but not outside the ranges, but M1
was behaving quite nicely within your new 6 to 11 percent range. Say
it's only 10-1/2 percent.

7/8-9/86

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That would bother me.

MR. ANGELL.

That could be a real problem.

MR. MORRIS.

Or it could be like 1976, when Ml came in very

low.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We can't deal with every contingency
with one set of numbers. All I am saying is that I think there is a
danger of getting into a position where we have no quantitative hook
whatsoever.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will see tomorrow, with a short
additional argument, whether you can persuade your colleagues.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Sounds reasonable.

[Meeting recessed]

7/8-9/86

July 9, 1986--Morning Session
[Secretary's Note: Chairman Volcker called for a discussion
of the economic outlook.]
MR. KEEHN. Well, Mr. Chairman, our outlook for this year and
next year is consistent with the staff forecast; our numbers are close
in a broad sense.
In the Midwest conditions of expansion continue but
certainly at a slower pace than in some other parts of the country.
The consumer side out our way is pretty vigorous.
Retail sales have
been improving and one chain we talked to had the [best] May they have
had in years. Auto sales seem to be pretty high, about equal to last
year's level.
But the manufacturing sector, as always, is pretty
mixed. There are parts of it that have been doing well and continue
to do well; building products are an example of that.
All of the
people in the building products side are operating pretty much at the
top of their capacity. Those parts that have been weak show no
particular sign of improvement. A somewhat recent development is that
two large crane manufacturers in the Midwest in effect have gone out
of that business; they just decided to get out.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What kind of manufacturers?

MR. KEEHN. Heavy crane manufacturers. Farm equipment and
railroad equipment are operating at about 25 percent of their levels
of the late 1970s.
Every once in a while, maybe for myself, I take a
look at the railroad numbers.
In May of this year, for example, there
were all of 950 cars ordered.
For the five months through May 1986,
ordering has been at about the 6,000 level.
That's up from 1985, but
for the full year in railway equipment there is the anticipation that
there will be about 10,000 cars ordered. That compares with the peak
level in 1979 of about 90,000. That certainly is one example of a
troubled industry.
There are two specific areas that I thought I would comment
on. One is construction activity, which in the District and in
Chicago particularly, has been and continues to be extraordinarily
strong. On the residential side, housing starts in the District for
the [first] five months of the year are up 24 percent as compared with
those five months a year ago.
In Illinois they are up 57 percent and
I think that's the largest increase of any state in the country.
In
Chicago the number is even much larger than 57 percent.
So, we have a
very significant housing boom going on.
In the nonresidential sector, floor contracts are continuing
at what seem like increasing levels. For the five months of this year
floor area contracts on nonresidential [structures] are up about 5
percent; that's a contrast from the national figures, which indicate a
slump. And in Chicago the office boom continues despite the strong
activity that we have had over the last two or three years.
Many
buildings are being announced; in one way or another some 14 million
square feet have been committed to over and above what is already
going on. My conclusion on this is that in the construction side we
have some trends going on that certainly seem pretty unsustainable.
On the inflation side, the news continues to be pretty good.
Pricing is terribly tight. Everybody I talk to says that both raw
material and product prices are extremely tight, with very little

-26-

7/8-9/86

give, and increases certainly just aren't sticking. That's true even
for the industries that are going through pretty high levels of
activity. Paperboard is an example.
That's an industry that is doing
well.
This April they had the biggest April that they had ever had in
that industry and yet even now the pricing is only very modestly
recovered from the amount that they lost during the recession. I
commented before on labor contracts that have been settled.
I think
the news there continues to be pretty good. By and large the
contracts are coming out on a three-year basis at about 3 percent or a
touch under--a higher settlement in the first year but declining in
the second and third years.
But importantly--and this goes back to a
chart that Mike Prell was showing yesterday--I am hearing that there
are very, very substantial work rule changes in these contracts.
Although managements are going after the financial side, they are
really going all out after the work rule side. As a consequence of
those substantial work rule changes, in terms of unit labor costs, I
think the outlook is pretty good.
Two steel companies have settled
their contract negotiations; hourly wages were reduced and in both
Inland Steel's contract was up for a
cases the COLAs were eliminated.
vote. The ballots were counted yesterday and I don't know how it came
out, but that would suggest a similar pattern. Caterpillar settled
over the weekend. They have not announced the terms of the deal, but
they did reach a negotiation and the expectation is, or it's entirely
possible, that it will call for a wage freeze but that they did not
get rid of the COLA. They wanted to get rid of the COLA but they did
not.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Who is that?

MR. KEEHN. Caterpillar. I know you saw the
and I think he was suggesting to you a higher number
than, in fact, worked out.
It sounds like they got a freeze but
didn't get rid of the COLA. They went into [the negotiations]
thinking they'd have a higher number. Deere is next on the list and
they will have a very tough negotiation; they would like to get rid of
the COLA and they would like to get a freeze as well.
I might mention
that there is a little mini-exception to this 3-year, 3 percent
pattern that I mentioned.
It relates to us.
The Chicago Building
Trades have been [unintelligible]--those that had an impact on our
building projects.
There was a settlement there over the weekend for
a 2-year contract and a 5 percent annual increase. But I think that's
a very narrow, very specialized kind of situation. Net, the labor
cost situation seems to be pretty good and the outlook for the next
year or so okay.
I have a final comment on this tax legislation. As I talk to
people, I have a growing feeling of gloominess on the business side in
that the shift of the burden from the consumer to the business side
seems to be having a heavier toll, at least on outlooks.
And I think
the introduction of the changes on a staggered basis is causing
apprehension.
I hear what Jim says as to the impact but, at least as
I hear the comments, it sounds like it might have a greater effect on
1987 than perhaps they have provided for [in the forecast].
As we
look at it now, we expect the expansion to continue, though certainly
at a more modest pace than was our expectation earlier in the year.
But at this point, as we view it, we are very, very dependent upon the
consumer; and I think as a consequence it will be important that we do
anything we can do to deal with the consumer side of this.

7/8-9/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. Our forecast is very similar to that of the
Board's staff. We do have a slightly more rapid pickup in the second
half of this year, but I must admit that more recent information that
we have about inventories raises the likelihood that the pickup will
get a later start.
Also, our forecast for business fixed investment
is slightly greater than that of the Board's staff. For 1987, our
forecast for growth is virtually the same. We differ in our inflation
forecast; but I think our forecast of a percentage point higher number
for inflation is not all that significantly different, given the
uncertainties associated with the forecast at this time.
In the Twelfth District, the general economic picture remains
quite mixed. We have quite a few industries that are doing well, such
as commercial aircraft, electronics, and retail trade. But we also
have our share of weak industries. Agriculture is weak and a little
The thing
weakness has shown up again in the forest products area.
that I would like to note is that in recent discussions with our
directors and also with our business and agricultural advisory council
and others in the business community, there has been a noticeable
erosion of confidence in the last month or two. Before we were
hearing optimistic signs from all of these people; now they seem to
think that things have become noticeably worse. Basically, I think
their comments are reflecting the weakness that actually did occur in
the second quarter. And frankly, they expect it to continue in the
second half. I sometimes think that their forecasts are based
primarily on what they see over their shoulder or what they are
experiencing at the present time. But I think it is significant that
On Thursday, we
their sentiment has changed in the last month or so.
It's interesting to
will have a meeting of our board of directors.
note that at the last two board meetings there has been a very close
vote against lowering the discount rate; I really think it's quite
likely that that's going to change at this Thursday's meeting.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. When you have a spate of bad news such as we have
had the last month or two, it's very tempting to focus on that part
The good news is that the
alone; I think all of us tend to do that.
same thing happens on the other side and I think it's good for us to
step back a little and try to take a little longer perspective than we
sometimes do.
If I remember correctly, back in April we were all
pretty bullish because we had several fundamental factors that we
thought were going to oil the wheel for the last half of the year: we
had the declines in prices; the depreciation in the dollar; and then
the continued low inflation. All this seemed to suggest to us that
things were going to accelerate. And that was a very short while ago.
Now, of course, we have reached the point where the depressing effect
of the oil price decline on the producers is apt to be replaced by or
surpassed by the positive effect on the oil users.
So putting all
these things together, it still seems reasonable to me that we ought
to have a pretty fair increase in the second half of this year. We
have revised our figures downward as a result of the bad news that has
come in, but we are still just a tad above where the Board staff is
and about where the consensus is of the Reserve Bank presidents'
If we get some more information that is below par and in
forecasts.
particular if we don't see some improvement in the trade situation,

-28-

7/8-9/86

But for
then I think we are going to have to take another look at it.
the time being we think that we might have [growth of] 3-1/2 percent
in the third quarter and maybe 4-1/4 percent or something like that in
the fourth quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, in the Sixth District growth
has been about the same as in the nation as a whole over the first
half of the year. But over the last month or so we have seen some
weakening of the District economy on average. To be sure, we still
Consumer spending
have some pretty positive sectors in the economy.
has held up pretty well: merchandise sales have been good,
particularly in the furniture area, which had been hard hit by imports
but recently seems to have been helped by the pickup in housing in the
Southeast; and auto sales, while off a bit, still continue at a pretty
Single family housing has been good and, like other parts
high level.
of the country, we have benefitted from the slackening of European and
other overseas travel and tourism has picked up considerably. That
has been a positive element in most areas of the District.
I have been reporting pretty favorable news in the Southeast
over the past year or so, but this time I think I would have to point
to some very serious problems that have developed. First and
foremost, of course, is the energy sector with a contraction that I
And the
believe has been more severe than we had expected earlier.
weakness has spread beyond the energy sector itself and is reaching
into state governments. For example, in Louisiana I heard a report
that the state government is cutting back severely in the university
system; programs are being cut and I think that will continue in other
The lumber industry also has been badly
parts of the state as well.
Vacancy rates in most
hit.
Commercial construction is a concern.
cities are not quite as high as the national average, but they are
increasing; we are at a level of almost 20 percent on average. And a
recent development that could become a very serious situation if it
continues is the very severe shortage of rainfall that we have
experienced. We have seen in most of the Southeast the most severe
drought in over 100 years.
That is having an impact, of course, not
only on agriculture, which is already weak, but on other areas as
well; and that impact is going to become even more severe if we don't
get some relief. Water rationing, for example, is in effect in many
places and now is beginning to have some effect on business
production. Going back to the energy sector for just a moment, I
wanted to mention that the rig count of Louisiana is now the lowest
since 1949.
Looking beyond the Sixth District to the nation as a whole,
we too have changed our forecast for the latter part of 1986.
We
don't think that activity is going to be quite as strong as we had
forecast earlier.
We are about on the same mark as the Board staff in
terms of growth for the latter part of 1986.
For 1987, I think we are
showing slightly higher growth. Our difference with the Board staff's
forecast in 1987 I think relates basically to inflation. We see
inflation somewhat higher than the Board staff; the difference there,
as I have analyzed it, is that we perhaps are attributing a little
more impact to the dollar effect than the Board staff is.

7/8-9/86

I have just two final comments that echo what Si Keehn was
saying. People that I am talking to around the District are very
I think the
apprehensive about the effects of the tax bill.
uncertainty surrounding it is certainly causing them to pause with
But having said all that, when I talk
respect to business investment.
to people generally, the confidence level as of maybe a week and half
People in individual businesses say "My
ago was still pretty high.
In trying to analyze this, I have
business has never been better."
just a very quick impression [along the lines] of what we were just
talking about this morning. People who are reporting very good
results for the first half of 1986 are basically the smaller and
I don't hear that from the larger concerns.
middle-sized businesses.
I don't know whether
I just throw that out for what it may be worth.
that has general applicability or not.
In summary, Mr. Chairman, my feeling is that if we don't see
some faster activity emerging pretty soon, I think the more positive-the more acceptable--outlook for 1987 really may not develop.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. The Third District continues to do better than
the nation as a whole. Construction activity, particularly the
Pennsylvania ranks second only
housing market, has been quite good.
to California in the total number of existing homes sold during the
first quarter, and the average cost of a house in the Northeast is
higher than the cost of a house in the West for the first time in
recent history. Nonresidential construction has begun to soften some,
but not to the extent that it has in the nation as a whole. Retail
sales have been especially good in the Philadelphia area; I think it
has something to do with the relative strengthening of expectations
about the economic future of the area, which for a number of years was
I think it is beginning to catch up to people as the
not good.
outlook is better. Manufacturing continues to be something of a drag,
If you look
but not as much of a drag as in the rest of the country.
at things like help wanted advertising, that has reached a high point
and continues to be expanding. It's awfully hard, particularly in the
suburbs, to go into stores without seeing signs in the windows asking
I find the same kind of dichotomy, however, as
for people to apply.
There does seem to be more optimism among people
Bob Forrestal does.
in smaller and medium-sized businesses than those in the older,
I guess that has to do with just the nature
traditional large firms.
of the economy. I have not sensed a general deterioration in
I think sentiment is still reasonably
sentiment, as Si has.
optimistic for later in the year, although it may be more fragile than
it was a few months ago.
Turning to the nation, there is something of a dichotomy in
what I have just said about my own region and my views about what is
I am more bearish now about the outlook than
going on in the nation.
The reasons have to do with both the timing
I was a few months ago.
as well as perhaps some changes in the fundamentals--or at least our
In recent discussions around the
perception of the fundamentals.
table, I think most of us have tended to emphasize the positive things
about the economy: the drop in the dollar and oil prices, etc., etc.
Yet there are a number of drags: in petroleum, in farming, in export
demand, and tax reform itself. While most people think it's probably
good over the long pull, there is definitely a drag in the short pull.

-30-

7/8-9/86

My sense is that we have tended to over-emphasize the effects of the
stimulative factors and have not taken into account, at least to
enough of an extent, those factors that are dragging on the economy.
Part of it is timing, but I think some of it may be more fundamental
than that.
So where I come out is that, yes, I still think there is
going to be a pickup. But I am less sure of that than I was; I have
more doubts about it.
I find it quite difficult to see the threat of
too much economic growth in the months ahead, but I could much more
easily visualize too little. On the inflation front, I think
inflation is an ongoing threat and we have to be careful about it and
sensitive to it.
But it does strike me as less of a threat now than
the threat of too anemic an economy as we go to the end of 1986 and
into 1987.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. My forecast is similar to the staff's forecast,
but I have found myself in the last three or four months relatively
I focus these
concerned about the downside risks of the forecast.
concerns on two particular areas. First of all, like many others, my
forecast depends on a significant improvement in exports and I wonder
whether that is really going to come to pass.
The other area that I
focus my concerns on is the long list of imbalances in the economy.
I'm not quite sure how that works through the forecast as would the
failure of net exports to improve; but the list is long and this seems
to me to be a very difficult economic environment for a recovery to
continue.
Turning to the District, our recent numbers show no
significant strengthening but no significant deterioration in economic
activity. From businessmen in our District--our directors among them
--I sense a growing caution but not yet disappointment in the economy.
Perhaps they are not disappointed on the trade side because they were
always skeptical about the trade rebound; they didn't expect it and it
hasn't happened. They continue to report intense import competition
and we, like Si Keehn, also have industries that simply have been
unable to lift their prices. Again, as in Si's District, our
businessmen and directors seem fairly happy with the labor
arrangements they have.
I know it's fashionable to talk about changes
in work rules when you have labor settlements, but I hear that talk
often enough and from enough people that I think they are not
posturing--that maybe this is really happening.
I hear a lot of good
feelings about the whole labor arrangement that businessmen are
facing. A lot of the them seem to attribute the present sluggishness
to the up-front problems with the oil industry. We have a reasonable
amount of that in Ohio; Marathon just announced layoffs yesterday, as
In conclusion, I think the economic outlook is
a matter of fact.
good, but the risks are increasingly on the down side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, the New England economy is
still growing extremely well as exemplified by the fact that McDonalds
is offering $4.95 an hour and is still having trouble finding people
to flip hamburgers. But my reading is that the national numbers are
very disturbing. I have been very optimistic that we were going to
see an acceleration in real activity in the last half of the year,
certainly on the basis of what the broader monetary aggregates have

7/8-9/86

done in the first half. That suggests that we ought to be seeing
about a 7 percent nominal GNP growth, and I thought that was just
about right. But the staff is now forecasting 5 percent instead of 7
percent. And I am inclined to agree with Mr. Boehne and Mrs. Horn
that if there's something wrong with our forecast, it could be that
the forecast is too optimistic.
I see a sense of contrast between
[the economy and] the financial numbers.
If I were sitting on a
desert island and had only the financial numbers, I would say there is
a tremendous boom going on in the United States.
But if you look at
the numbers for real activity, the last month gives no encouragement
that we are going to get a faster rate of growth in the third quarter.
The new orders figures certainly don't suggest it.
The deceleration
I really
in the rate of payroll employment gains doesn't suggest it.
don't understand what is going on out there. The system is not
responding according to the rule books that I would follow. So, I
find this very disturbing. For months I have been thinking that
monetary policy has been doing everything it could to produce a
healthy economy.
I am less confident of that today because of the
seeming failure of the real economy to respond to what the financial
economy has been doing.
MR. BLACK.
wet string!

It looks like the string we're pushing on is a

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Well, Mr. Chairman, as I have been reporting,
things have not been going all that well in our District. The
Eleventh District economy seems to be about the weakest in the
country. Not only has our situation gotten a little worse, we expect
The
it to deteriorate even further and possibly at a bit faster pace.
Texas unemployment rate in June rose to 10-1/2 percent, and that's the
highest level in modern times, certainly, for Texas. New Mexico and
Louisiana expect to show increases in unemployment when their data
become available.
The last report for Louisiana was 13 percent and
that's probably on the way up.
As conditions worsen in energy,
construction, and manufacturing, that is having some fairly severe
effects on our financial institutions.
If you read the papers, it's
pretty hard not to see one of our Texas organizations being featured
in one of the articles.
Their performance has really not been all
that good! Looking at it from a supervisory standpoint, we don't
[rate] our major bank holding companies very high from a supervisory
level!
Those that seem to be doing a little better we wonder about,
because some of their major subsidiaries haven't been examined for a
year or year and a half and that makes us a little concerned over what
the true situation might be.
Now, I tried very hard to find some positive elements of
strength in our District to report this time, but I just was not
successful. Aside from this regional report, though, I continue to
feel with regard to the broader picture that there will be some modest
pickup in the second half of this year. Our forecast is in the middle
of the forecasts of the Reserve Bank presidents.
And we think this is
sustainable into 1987, if there's some monetary stimulus that comes
about to offset the economic drag of the uncertainties that are
inherent in the fiscal environment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

7/8-9/86

MR. MELZER.
In the Eighth District, I'd say things are going
along pretty well.
We've heard a couple of comments about a change in
psychology; I haven't detected too much of that.
Psychology among
businessmen is pretty much the same as it has been according to what
I've picked up.
On an annual basis, we've had a good year in terms of
nonag employment gains; they have exceeded the national gains by about
a percentage point. Manufacturing employment has been pretty much
flat, although in the most recent three-month period we had modest
gains there. Retail sales were lagging somewhat early in the second
quarter, although the sentiment was that the second quarter and the
third quarter would come in quite strong. Residential construction
has been mixed.
Single-family construction has been and continues to
be very strong, particularly in St. Louis; commercial construction
activity in St. Louis, which I think in general has lagged behind some
other cities in the country, continues to be strong and in the
District overall it is down less than nationally.
In terms of the broader picture, our forecast would be for
the same rate of real growth as the Board's staff has both for the
balance of this year and next year and somewhat higher on the
inflation side.
In terms of real growth, while that's lower than I
might have expected a month or two ago, I'm not particularly troubled
about looking at 3 to 3-1/2 percent real growth as a projection, given
the overall growth rate that seems to be prevailing in the world and
productivity gains and so forth.
So, while it's lower, it's not
something that at this point troubles me to the extent that I'd be
inclined to react to it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Dealing first with our District, the crosscurrents that have characterized the economy in the District are a
generalization between the rural economy and the urban economy.
Those
cross-currents persist, with the urban economies in general doing
reasonably well and the rural economies continuing to struggle.
Beyond that, looking at some of the state-by-state data, one of the
things that has emerged recently is that the numbers in the two states
in our District that have some involvement in the energy area, Montana
and North Dakota, clearly look worse than the rest of the District.
In the rest of the District, while growth isn't as gloomy, in general
I would say it's certainly respectable and reasonably broad-based.
But because of the energy involvement it looks like there is some
contraction, certainly in Montana, and maybe some flatness in North
Dakota. Beyond that, one of the more interesting things that has
happened recently, and was a surprise to me, was that three or four
new nonresidential construction projects have been announced for the
Twin Cities.
Whether that is good in the long run, of course, is an
open question because I think we are close to--if not already at--an
overbuilt situation. But in the short term that probably does augur
well for employment and so forth in the metropolitan area.
As far as the national outlook is concerned, I share the
optimism evidenced in the Board staff's forecast, and indeed, I might
be inclined to go a bit beyond that.
It seems to me, as Mike Prell
suggested yesterday, that there are several factors that we can
identify right now that clearly have been retarding the economy-things like what is going on in agriculture, the adjustment in the
energy sector, nonresidential construction activity in general, and

7/8-9/86

It seems to
the lack of improvement in the trade situation to date.
me that we can at the same time identify a couple of those negative
factors that have been retarding the economy as having a fairly high
In particular, I'm
probability of turning around at some point.
thinking about a prospective improvement in trade and certainly at
some point a slowing, if not a stop, in the deterioration stemming
It's impossible, I think, to say with any
from the energy side.
precision when that may occur. But I think we can look forward to
some diminution in those factors that have been inhibiting economic
growth. And when that is coupled with what I think are still some
very strong fundamentals--the kinds of things that we have talked
about in the past like lower interest rates, a lower value of the
dollar internationally, lower energy prices, and so forth--to my mind
the case for some acceleration in the pace of economic activity is
still a compelling one. But I would repeat the caveat that I think
it's impossible to say with any precision exactly when this may
materialize. I didn't find the second-quarter performance
particularly discouraging in this regard, because it seems to me that
we have been well aware and have been saying for some time around here
that the adjustment has been occurring in energy. We've been well
aware of the so-called J-curve effects on the trade side and weren't
confident--or at least I personally didn't expect--that somehow in the
second quarter things were going to start to improve materially. But
I think the basic case, and certainly my own expectation, for some
improvement in real growth is still there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just a couple of quick words about
the District situation, which I think is a lot like others have
described in that small and medium-sized firms, even in manufacturing,
are doing quite well to very well. Nonresidential construction and
the housing markets are very, very strong, especially in the New York
The service sector--and of course there's a
metropolitan area.
special premium on financial services--is in a state of near frenzy.
But there's a great question in my mind as to how sustainable that is.
The large firms, especially large manufacturing firms--both those that
[operate] there and those that are headquartered there--are by and
large pretty dismal in terms of their outlook. Even in the case of
IBM, which earlier in the year seemed to think that things were about
to take a turn for the better, certainly doesn't have any conviction
behind that outlook at this juncture.
In terms of the national economy, my own forecast is very
similar, and almost identical, to the staff forecast in both the
But I must say, I have
aggregate sense and in most of the details.
perhaps as little conviction about a forecast at this point as I've
ever had.
I could easily put together a forecast that's stronger and
I could easily put together one that's weaker.
Some of the factors
that have been mentioned--energy, commercial construction, and
agriculture--are the obvious things that would point in the latter
direction. But abstracting from those particular areas of concern, I
have two overriding concerns: the first is this financial sector
dichotomy that Frank Morris referred to.
I too find it very hard to
rationalize the patterns of behavior that we see in financial markets
--not just in the United States but around the world--with what seems
to be going on in the real economy. And I have a nagging feeling that
we may be a little more accident prone there than we would like to

7/8-9/86

admit.
I say that not with a view on nonperforming loans at banks, as
much of a problem as that can be in its own right, but more that when
I look at the sheer volume and volatility that we see in the financial
markets these days, I can't help but think that when we have a 62 or
63 point change in the Dow-Jones average in one day, that in itself
feeds on this sense of uneasiness that a number of people have been
referring to around the table. It makes you scratch your head a
little and say: What the heck is going on here?
The other area of great concern that I have that transcends
these particular sectoral concerns is the continuing economic,
financial, and indeed political, implications of the trade and current
I read all the books about J-curves and all the
account situation.
rest of the [hype] but I must say I still have, and perhaps
increasingly, a great deal of difficulty seeing how we will work
ourselves out of that situation in an orderly way short of a
recession-induced correction, which would obviously be very, very
messy.
As a number of people have suggested, I too sense that maybe
I think the reason for that may
confidence levels have ebbed a bit.
well be associated to some extent with these financial market goings
on. But I also think that there's a little phenomenon taking place
now where for a variety of reasons--including, for example, the court
ruling on Gramm-Rudman--the imbalances that have been there all along
are maybe showing through in a more transparent way than has been the
case. Again, I think we've got to keep some perspective on those
The staff forecast, for example, is going to produce an
imbalances.
Now, the last time we had
unemployment rate in 1986 of 7.1 percent.
When you look at
an unemployment rate of 7.1 percent was in 1980.
what has happened since 1980, there have been some very good things:
the inflation rate has come down from 10 to 2-1/2 percent and we are
now in one of the longest economic recoveries on record, despite this
enormous trade deficit. But when you look beneath that, in 1980 we
had a trade surplus in real terms in excess of $50 billion. We now
have a trade deficit in real terms of $140 billion. In 1980, the
budget deficit was $50 billion or $60 billion; it's now $200 billion
plus.
In 1980, the personal saving rate was 7 percent; now it's 4
percent. And those fundamentals are not going to change very easily.
To some extent, I think what we're seeing right now is a renewed
appreciation that those fundamentals are there. And the final irony,
of course, is that if indeed the economy were slipping badly, one of
the things one thinks about doing is trying to provide some fiscal
stimulus. But as a practical matter, we're not exactly in the ideal
It all comes back to saying that the
position to be able to do that.
It's
whole ball game seems unfortunately to rest on monetary policy.
a very difficult outlook; and I guess I would be in the camp with
those who are more worried rather than less worried.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. What has happened and
what is happening in the Tenth District is not greatly different than
what I have described in past meetings, and that is, that it's a very
unbalanced situation. In the urban areas, things are going quite
nicely except in Oklahoma, which is particularly impacted by the
energy and agricultural situation. And in the rural areas there's
growing desperation as to how this whole thing will play itself out.

-35-

7/8-9/86

Having said that, I guess I'd like to focus on a couple of good pieces
of information. One would be that the wheat crop is out and was a
good crop.
The weather in the growing season has been very good for
all the crops, generally speaking, in the Tenth District. And I guess
I take some comfort that they are having a drought in the Southeast,
which will improve the commodity prices spilling into the Tenth

District or [unintelligible].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

It doesn't seem to be improving much.

MR. GUFFEY. Not very much; I'm afraid that's right. Another
piece of information that comes out of a quarterly survey that we
conduct has to do with agricultural real estate prices. There was a
further drop from the fourth quarter to the first quarter of about 5
percent in agricultural real estate values. That's down roughly 21
percent from a year ago and roughly 50 percent of the values posted in
1981, which was the high point. But the good news that may be showing
through is that ranch land, for example, was down 7 percent, but crop
land was only down 3 percent; and that is a slowing in the decline in
crop land values. So, to the extent that you're searching for any
good news, I suppose you could dwell on that only briefly to say that
maybe we're getting close to the bottom of the decline in agricultural
real estate values.
With respect to the energy sector, it continues to worsen.
For example, in the District there are 193 rigs now working and that's
roughly 1/3 of the number of rigs that were working at the end of
January of 1986, just a few months ago. In the banking sector,
particularly that part that services agriculture and energy, [the news
is bad]. At the agriculture-related banks the loan-to-deposit ratio
is only at 53 percent, which is the lowest level since we began doing
the survey in 1976--which merely says that the banks can't find any
credit-worthy borrowers. This demonstrates some of the pain and the
distress that is showing up and clearly is present in the agricultural
and energy areas.
With respect to manufacturing in the District, the farm
machinery and oil equipment manufacturing is weak. On the other hand,
auto assemblies, which are a very big component of our economy, are
still going full out. In general aviation, aircraft for example is a
very depressed part of the economy. Tourism is very strong,
apparently in large part because of people travelling in the United
States rather than going abroad.
Turning attention to the nation, our projections are very
similar to the staff projections. But increasingly, I am concerned
about the pickup we have been expecting in the third and fourth
quarters as well as in 1987 because it seems largely dependent upon
the net export position. The swing that the staff has built in is
If that
fairly dramatic between now and the first quarter of 1987.
does not come to pass, it seems to me that the economy is going to
continue to buck along at a 2 percent [rate] in the period ahead; and
it seems to me that perhaps that's not satisfactory for the long pull.
To the extent that monetary policy [through] interest rate levels can
impact that, I guess I would be more inclined today to do something
along that line than I have been in the past, even though it will help
only at the margin and not be of great benefit in my view to my

7/8-9/86

section of the country. But at the national level, I'm coming closer
to feeling the need to do something more in the monetary policy area.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that the most significant factor
we face is that the world economy is not really going much of
anywhere; it's stagnant. And I think it's behaving about like we
would expect the world economy to behave in a period in which
international credit had been on one path--on a 20-25-30 percent
growth path--and then entered a period of much slower growth.
And world trade is no longer
Adjustments get to be very difficult.
I think maybe we are beginning
[moving in] an expansionary fashion.
to find out why it was that protectionism got to be such a significant
In this environment it's only
movement in the 1920s and early 1930s.
natural that everyone will worry more about their market share than
And in this environment I think
they will about a growing market.
it's very difficult for us to expect to make as much gain on our
I think it's going to be
balance of trade as we would like to make.
very difficult for those who enjoyed huge balance of trade surpluses
not to have pretty slow growth economies unless they do something
about the deflationary impact on their economies.
Apparently, I see inflation somewhat differently than others
do.
I have come to see it less as a set of numbers that behave in
I
such and such a pattern than to see inflation laws and attitudes.
And
see an attitude that says that prices rise and prices don't fall.
during such a period, individuals are anxious to restructure their
During
portfolios away from monetary assets to real assets.
inflationary periods, you see, people are rewarded who are good at
In such a period you find--whether
making portfolio shifts like that.
you're in the farming business or in the oil business or whatever
business you're in--that you make more money depending upon how fast
you borrow money and how fast you buy equipment and how fast you spend
money.
A
But a deflationary environment is really quite different.
deflationary environment is one in which people begin to see that
It seems to me that John Maynard
prices can fall as well as rise.
Keynes in his Treatise on Money gave some really good indications
about what one might expect to happen during such periods. And it
seems to me that what is happening in the world's economy reflects the
actuality of inflation being less than anticipated. I might suggest
that if we're to do our job in economic analysis--of course, we cannot
But whenever we as a profession
always forecast without any errors.
begin to forecast the rate of inflation over a 5- 6- or 7-year period
and all the errors are in one direction, then I think one could make
some case for the fact that inflation expectations are misplaced. And
those with time lags in production find out they can't sell their
product at the price they thought they could, so people's behavior
changes.
It seems to me that we're finding that kind of behavior
change under way. And in this behavior pattern more firms are going
to devote attention to cutting costs than they are to trying to buy a
lot more equipment.
The adjustment process is really rather
significant.
So, even though I used to be more pessimistic than
others in some ways, I turn out to be somewhat more optimistic in a
sense.
We have undergone such a significant deflation in many areas

7/8-9/86

of our economy and we're still kind of hanging on and I think that's a
real plus.
I believe we have to recognize [changed conditions] in
agriculture, and Jerry may have been somewhat of a stimulus there.
But when direct government payments to farmers and price support
activity and direct payments for compensation for [unintelligible]
differences are moved from a $12 billion annual rate up to a planned
$24 billion annual rate and it is missed so badly, as I believe this
last agricultural bill has missed it, that the actual expenditures
[unintelligible]--they are going to run more like $32 billion than $24
billion--that puts a lot of support money out there. And eventually
that's going to hold up.
If we can continue to try to have some patience and be
cautious and make careful moves so interest rates adjust to changed
conditions in the world, it seems to me that we have a chance to
continue along on what some may think is a rather slow growth path.
The only disadvantage of that slow growth path may be that it makes it
very difficult to get the government budget back in shape. As you
know, when things happen in agriculture as they have happened, then
those Gramm-Rudman targets get out of kilter. So that adjustment
process may be very, very slow. But it seems to me that we have a
good chance to keep expansion going for some time in the future. I'm
not going to be too pessimistic on the basis of the numbers coming out
right now; I'm going to be optimistic as long as we respond with
interest rates to market perceptions in regard to these world economic
conditions.
I would certainly have a different forecast if I thought
we were going to peg short-term interest rates and prevent them from
So, I'm in a position of saying that
responding to market conditions.
I'm not sure that
my forecast is exactly the way it was in February.
is all that good but it may not be all that bad, if we can avoid any
major deflationary or financial market disruptions that
[brinkmanship], I suppose, runs a risk of encountering.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't want to interrupt this because
we've got to move along. But I don't understand this chart that we
It only shows that
had yesterday on government payments to farmers.
they are about $12 billion and I thought they were more like what
Governor Angell was reciting.
MR. PRELL. Those numbers include the direct payments, that
There is a certain amount that
is, largely the deficiency payments.
the government is committed to making up if the farmers' prices are
There is also the dairy cow reduction program.
below a certain level.
[Our number] doesn't include CCC and some of the other programs that
Governor Angell was mentioning.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. They certainly include something
[unintelligible].
Governor Rice.
MR. RICE. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff's forecast is
about the best way of looking at things right now. I continue to look
for the pickup in the second half, though it likely will be less of an
acceleration than I expected a month ago and probably will be later in
the second half than I expected. But like others, I find the
situation looks more clouded than usual, in part because of some of
It is
the factors pointed out by Frank Morris and Jerry Corrigan.

-38-

7/8-9/86

very difficult to read what is going on right now. At the present
time, I have less confidence in my view of the future than I have had
in some time. It could be that I am being, as are others, unduly
influenced by the most recent data that we have seen over the last
month. I hope that is so. But if we stand back and look at what is
going on, I think we have to recognize, as Gary Stern pointed out,
that some of the factors that have been dragging down the economy are
likely to become less influential in the future. The fundamentals
that we counted on to spur the economy are still there. In my mind,
it is hard to imagine that business fixed investment will come in
lower than the staff forecast. It seems to me that [the forecast] in
that sector is probably a rock bottom outlook. And while a turnaround
in net exports may be delayed somewhat further, it is hard to imagine
that it will be delayed beyond the second half. I expect that we will
see this acceleration before the end of the year, and my own guess is
that the risks are not on the down side--that we are not likely to get
a poorer performance than the staff's forecast. If anything, it will
be somewhat better than the staff's forecast. Now, all of this is
clouded further by the overhang of tax reform. Tax reform, of course,
is factored into the staff's forecast. But in my mind, there are
certain psychological effects that can't be factored in, which could
perhaps have a more restraining impact than one would imagine at the
present time. This would be especially true if the revenue raising
provisions kick in ahead of the cut in rates. So, while I would
repeat that the risk is probably on the up side of the staff's
forecast, there are these imponderables out there that are very
difficult to factor in.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. Well, I think business is sluggish and I think it
has been sluggish for most of this year. Economists, both within and
outside government, that I have spoken with in the last week or so
seem to be busily revising their forecasts--mostly downward--probably
in reaction to the recent rather weak indicators. Back in February, I
think Wayne Angell and I had the two lowest forecasts for real GNP
growth for this year; mine was 2-1/2 percent. And after hearing all
the bullish comments at the table, I was feeling guilty about it so I
took advantage of Jim Kichline's offer to accept revisions and I put
it up to 3 percent. Now I have moved it back down to 2-1/2 percent;
I'm going round trip on this. Unfortunately, I just don't see what is
I would like to see it happen; I
going to cause business to pep up.
would like to see stronger growth in the second half of this year. I
would like to see a very healthy, dynamic economy next year too, but I
just have doubts about our ability to pull it off. I know we are
relying very heavily on a trade turnaround, but the people in trade
that I speak with have convinced me that it is going to be very
We have already seen that the lags are longer; they
difficult to do.
I agree with the comments of President
are going to be still longer.
Keehn and Governor Rice and some of the others about the impact of tax
reform. Just the uncertainties that have arisen from the proposals
have tended to curb businesses' enthusiasm for expansion and

modernization.

And if what is in the Senate bill actually becomes

law, the disincentives to investments are very, very great.

the way I read it, and this--

That is

-39-

7/8-9/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The way I read it, [unintelligible] it
could only be worse than what's in the Senate bill by the time it gets
finished in conference.
MS. SEGER. Yes, but what I am saying is that even what is in
the Senate bill will provide major disincentives to investment, even
though we desperately need to modernize our manufacturing sector,
particularly. Anyhow, I also sense that there is some deterioration
of confidence.
The latest survey done by the National Federation of
Independent Business, done in late June, showed a significant slipping
in the optimism among their members, particularly in their expected
gains in real sales for the rest of the year. Also, they have revised
downward their inventory and capital spending plans.
I sense too that
some of the inventory numbers and some of the new orders numbers were
distorted by these labor negotiations; individuals were building up
additional inventory to hedge against strikes in copper, aluminum and
steel and now it looks as if those strikes will not take place. They
will have to work these inventories off. In the auto industry, I
think some of the strength in sales is more apparent than real because
they are having to make such tremendous efforts to get these sales-very great interest rate incentives are required, or cash rebates to
customers, or additional rebates to the dealers themselves--and it is
just very very difficult to get these [sales].
Their inventories are
I can't imagine that this
also hefty, particularly at General Motors.
won't eventually lead to some pruning of production schedules.
I
would like to be a raging bull but I guess I can't quite do it today.
Thank you.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON.
I think everybody has just about covered all
the points, so I will try not to be too long-winded. There are a
couple of things I want to stress. First, I was generally very
optimistic too--in fact, I put in probably one of the stronger
forecasts for 1986--when we first gave these forecasts back in
February. Of course, for 1986 my forecast is now down in the 2
percent range from about a 4 to 4-1/2 percent range. What has
happened between the two periods for me is a growing pessimism about
the situation abroad in terms of the domestic growth possibilities in
the other industrial countries. There were strong expectations there;
and I think our forecasts and the staff forecast were totally
reasonable--exactly what you would expect if we had gotten reasonable
performance abroad. But things have been coming in substantially
weaker than what we expected overseas; I think we were looking for
something on the order of 3-1/2 to 4 percent real output growth in the
non-U.S. OECD countries.
I really am getting very gloomy about that;
I never thought that they could sustain the situation politically in
those countries with the kind of conditions that exist. But not only
are they sustaining it, their political strength seems to be growing,
which is a really strange phenomenon in these days and times.
I don't
think we can expect much on the export side of the market, and I think
that what we put into the growth path as a result probably ought to
come out.
That leaves the domestic economy much more dependent upon
domestically generated stimulative factors and I think that becomes
harder to do when no one else is participating in this real growth
process, because it runs the risk of exposing our exchange rate and
producing some pressures. Of course, if the rest of the world is

7/8-9/86

going to pursue recessionary conditions, I am not as concerned about
the exchange rate fallout as I would be otherwise.
So, I think that is the dilemma we are in. And under those
conditions, I think price pressures won't be as great.
As a matter of
fact, because of that, I think current nominal interest rates could
It
translate into higher real interest rates than we now think exist.
may be the case that what is happening now to the domestic side is
I made
that real interest rates are [higher] than we think they are.
this transition too: I also have some concerns about the uncertainty
associated with tax reform. I think that will pass when we get a bill
out of the way. But still, there are a lot of factors like this that
we have to deal with.
I would not be worried about the second half.
I agree with what Jerry was saying: that everybody expected a weak
second quarter. We had been forecasting that all the way back since
last year.
The problem is that the early indicators for the third
quarter don't look good. We are not seeing the kind of evidence that
we would expect to see in making the transition from a weak second
I think that's the problem and the
quarter to a stronger second half.
reason that is the problem is what I mentioned earlier--what is going
on abroad.
It is almost a helpless feeling to see what is going on
But I
abroad and not be able to feel there is something we can do.
think that is the situation.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Do you want to say something, Governor

Wallich?
MR. WALLICH. I can't
time to have a chance.

[unintelligible]

normal.

Allow me next

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think we have completed our goI don't have anything much to add to
around on the business outlook.
it, except I would pick up on the comments that Governor Johnson just
made and that Governor Angell made to some extent. We have had a lot
of what seem to me to be shocks--if that is the right word--on the
domestic economy: oil and tax reform are probably depressants; we have
been looking at overbuilding in construction for a long time and
that's headed south; we have had an awful agricultural situation. We
have had 3-1/2 years of expansion. I'd say maybe we are overcoming
some of those depressing influences by a rather large amount of
monetary and financial stimulation, which has its own difficulties
down the road as to its sustainability.
But the key problem is this trade problem. I don't think we
are going to solve it by depreciation. That may be necessary over a
period of time. We have had quite a lot.
Without a better business
picture around the world, I think depreciation in the short run will
worsen the business picture abroad as well as be a depressing
influence now on their economies.
Our growth has not been all that
great during the first half. However, in the world view it is not
The most depressing thing to me, in a
bad; in fact, it is better.
structural kind of sense, is that our economy is not growing very fast
and we are still growing faster than they are abroad--in particular
when our growth is being undercut by a continuing decline in the trade
balance right up to date.
So long as that problem exists, we are on a
collision course with something because we can't grow and build up the
rest of the world when we are starting with a trade balance [deficit]
of $140 billion or whatever it is, as opposed to three or four years

7/8-9/86

ago when we started at close to zero. Over a period of time I think
that also is related to the budget problem. But how do we get
We would like some stimulus here, but it is going to
stimulus abroad?
have to be less than what we get abroad in order to begin working on
the underlying problem; it is a nice trick, which isn't within our
It is really remarkable [to find] when you
control in any easy way.
talk to these foreigners how happy they are about the situation. They
seem to be perfectly content not to have much growth or a bit of
growth at the expense of rising trade surpluses.
MS. HORN. Paul, would you comment on a strategy that would
involve our easing policy or lowering the discount rate or whatever?
What kind of pressure would that put on foreign countries to, say,
stimulate their economies?
I think we ought to presume [that] in our
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I want to turn to the long run now, but I
short-run policymaking.
would say that we are going to have a decline in the discount rate,
say this week, if I read the tea leaves correctly. I didn't hear
anyone around the table say they were particularly adverse to that.
It is all backwards; the foreign
We just ought to assume that.
countries ought to be reducing [interest rates] or providing some kind
I think many of them would say that ideally they ought
of stimulus.
to be getting some fiscal stimulus--that they ought to be reducing
taxes or something. That is what the German monetary people say and
that is probably what the Japanese monetary people feel, but it is not
going to happen regardless of what is desirable. The second best
Based upon what
approach for them would be to ease monetary [policy].
I know, if we visibly [act]--say, by changing the discount rate--I
would assume that the Germans and the Japanese will not respond. They
say they will not respond. Whether they will or not depends upon
developments in the market. The idea that we can orchestrate a
general decline by the Japanese, Germans and ourselves this week or
I do
next week or the following week, I think is just not obvious.
think we will see some declines by the French, the British, the
Swedes, and maybe by somebody else in Europe, but I don't know who
else.
That may set up, apart from our change, a force that would
leave the Germans embarrassingly stuck out by themselves and may raise
I think economically a change by the
[pressures] on the Japanese.
French, British, and the Swedes won't make much different. But I
think that is what will happen: there will be a pretty prompt change
from some secondary countries but not a change by the Germans and the
We talked vaguely about making a change in
Japanese on round one.
September, but that is a little beyond the horizon that seems
But I think that is the situation we face.
immediately relevant.
Now, if we talked about a really big discount rate change, I don't
But I make these
know whether that would change [the reaction].
comments in the context of a 1/2 point change on the discount rate.
That is the way they talk. What the chances are, say, within a two
week period, that they would feel somewhat forced to change, I think
depends largely upon the exchange market and other factors; but that
is not their mood now.
I don't know to
Let's turn to the long run, to [M2 and] M3.
We are
what degree we can short circuit this [discussion].
Does anybody have in
comfortably within the ranges for M2 and M3.
mind proposing a change in the M2 and M3 ranges for 1986?

-42-

7/8-9/86

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

No.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. So, we can assume that they stay the same
and dispose of that quickly.
Then we move to 1987.
That's a
different page, isn't it?
MR. BERNARD.

Page 23.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. There isn't much difference in what is
being presented to us but we're free to propose anything between
keeping it the same next year or moving it all of one half percentage
point.
I don't detect any enormous economic significance in the
difference between 6 to 9 percent and 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent; there
Obviously, the slight
might be some psychological difference.
reduction fits in with the idea that we ought to lower the ranges over
time.
And if you match this against the forecast--I might mention
that you all have an opportunity, as usual, to change these forecasts
in the next couple of days.
So, you ought to review them and see
whether you want to [make any changes] in the light of this meeting.
Otherwise, we have a nominal GNP projection by the staff of 6-1/2
percent and [forecasts by] everybody else that run over a full range
of 5 to 8 percent, probably, but [cluster] at 6 to 7-1/2 percent.
Either of these proposed ranges for next year seems comfortably to
encompass a straight relationship [of money growth] to nominal GNP and
would allow for some decline in velocity.
MR. JOHNSON.

What has the velocity of M2 been?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, historically, you're looking--

I know it has been around zero.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Historically, it has been pretty close to
zero, but it has been declining in the last two years.
MR. KOHN. The last several years it has been declining 2 to
3 percentage points.
MR. JOHNSON.
for that pretty much.

So an 8-1/2 percent upward bound would account

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
GNP is running.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, it depends upon which way nominal

If we get a 6-1/2 percent nominal.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes,
half point from 9 percent.

It would allow for it.
I think we can afford to take it down a

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, a half point obviously shows some
progress toward a lower range.
I don't think the substantive
difference is great, but I don't know. Does anybody else want to say
anything?
MR. MORRIS.
I prefer to keep it unchanged. I think that we
would hope to have substantially larger nominal GNP [growth] next year

-43-

7/8-9/86

This year, with a projection of 5
than we're going to get this year.
percent nominal GNP [growth], we have M3 in the middle of the range.
It doesn't seem to me there's much of a case--if you take those two
key situations--to shrink the ranges.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am not sure one would expect this
kind of decline in velocity to persist in those particular aggregates.
Does anybody else want to say anything?
MR. ANGELL. Yes, I would agree with Frank. I think we just
I don't see any reason to change; I don't
don't know at this point.
think the gesture of a half point means that much at this point.
MR. PARRY. I guess I come out differently.
It seems to me
that if we want to signal a concern about continuing to make progress
against inflation, it might be a very good move to reduce it by half a
point.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. What are you actually projecting for M2,
I am not sure it's worth all that much;
for what it's worth?
nonetheless, what is the staff projecting for M2 and M3 for the year?
MR. KOHN.

For 1987?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KOHN.

For 1986.

Around 7-1/2 percent and about the same--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KOHN.
tenths of a point.

1986.

Yes.

Right at the midpoint.
And about the same for 1987, within a few

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I presume that, as for Ml, in a much more
moderate way you would assume that M2 and M3 velocity might tend to
decline with a significant decline in interest rates.
MR. KOHN. That's correct. The larger the decline in
interest rates, the more of a tendency for that. M2 velocity actually
declined 3 percent last year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It's anybody's guess, but my guess would
be that the decline in interest rates is going to be considerably
greater this year than it is likely to be next year.
I'm assuming
that we may get some more [rate declines] before the end of this year.
MR. JOHNSON.

I hope that's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me just get a general show of
preferences.
This is quite a narrow difference between 6 to 9 percent
and 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent. Nobody wants to talk outside that range,
I'll get preferences
How many would favor 6 to 9 percent?
I take it.
from everybody now, just for the fun of it anyway. How many prefer
the other way?
We are going to be pretty evenly split, I am afraid.
We have a pretty even split.

7/8-9/86

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Do a "could live with"--

Our 6 to 9 percent won.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

Pardon me?

We had 7 or 8 votes for 6 to 9 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I didn't count very carefully but
it's pretty close, I think. Does anybody want to make an argument one
way or the other here?
MR. JOHNSON. Well, there's not a big difference between the
two.
I was just thinking of the psychological effect: that [a half
point reduction] may still be showing a commitment to getting
In
inflation down at the same time that we may be abandoning Ml.
other words, an 8-1/2 percent top on the range for M2 would still
allow for a pretty explosive situation with Ml, if we have something
that looks like what we got this year. You're saying that M2 is
growing at a rate of about 7-1/2 percent this year so far, is that
right?
MR. KOHN.

Yes.

If that
MR. JOHNSON. And we see what's happened to M1.
pattern were to continue, we could still be within our M2 range even
with that Ml pattern.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is no life or death matter to me, but
I come out about where you do as a matter of preference, in terms of
I [don't] think we're going to
everything else rising pretty rapidly.
get in great trouble with 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent and it's probably
But it's
somewhat better to be in that posture rather than the other.
not a life or death matter; I'm not going to put my body over railroad
tracks for a half a percentage point.
MR. JOHNSON.

Same here.

MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that even if we had 6 to 9
If we
percent, we would have plenty of room to be at the bottom end.
find that we can get growth at the bottom end, then I think that's the
time for us to lower the ranges, rather than bring them down a half
I would
point and then have to take them up half a point some time.
rather demonstrate that we can do well within that 6 to 9 percent
range.
But it's no big deal.
MR. GUFFEY. First of all, let me say that I would prefer to
leave it at 6 to 9 percent, given a forecast that falls within a very
narrow range for the remainder of 1986 and 1987--and particularly
given that only a modest acceleration of inflation is being forecast.
Furthermore, the fact is that we'll be in the fifth year of a
recovery. That wouldn't seem to me to be the time to be moving money
growth to the lower level to give the impression that we're going to
work against inflation, when indeed the [inflation] forecast is pretty
modest for the period ahead.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can say that there's justification for
moving it lower; but a few people look at it differently, I guess.

7/8-9/86

MR. PARRY. It seems to me that if we are possibly going to
become somewhat more accommodative in the shorter term, then it would
be useful to have a message about our continuing concern about
inflation over the longer term. And I can't think of a better way to
do that than to reduce the range for 1987 at the same time that we are
going to be talking about the possibility of shorter-term ease.
MR. ANGELL.
Bob, I share your sympathies. And there will be
a point in time that I would like to be able to play that card of
reducing the ranges.
I just believe there will be another time when
we will need that emphasis, whereas today we would almost be giving it
away.
I would rather use it when the time comes that we need to say
we are going to plant our feet [against] any reinflation. That's when
I want to play that card.
MR. JOHNSON. On that point, it seems to me that it might
work better to lower it now even if we have to give it up later,
because right now we're talking about additional short-term ease and
it might be good to offset that psychologically with some future
commitment. We can always play that card if it looks like we're in a
situation when we have to later.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have the arguments on the table.
anybody have another argument they want to put on the table?

Does

MR. MORRIS. The other argument is that it doesn't make a
heck of a lot of difference, Mr. Chairman.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, I think we would all agree with that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me get down to the [preferences
For 6 to 9 percent: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. For 5-1/2
of] Committee members.
to 8-1/2 percent: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and I count myself with that as my
preference, so, 6. We only have 11 members these days, don't we? We
can't be any closer than that.
That's-MR. ANGELL.

Well, we

[concede].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If this minority is ready and willing to
concede, we'll assume the 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent.
So, it's 6 to 9
percent for this year and 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for next year. Let
me return to M1.
I haven't thought about this exhaustively overnight,
but let me try something out just to see whether I am in line roughly
with where I thought the sentiment lay yesterday in not trying to
destroy M1 completely.
I tried to visualize how this would be
presented in a table; it also would be reflected in the language,
obviously.
Suppose we leave the 3 to 8 percent for this year and put
it in brackets or add a star or maybe both in presenting the table and
we say: "The Committee did not change this target for this year in
view of all the uncertainty, but it certainly expects growth to run
above it this year."
That's for 1986.
For 1987, we could put in a
target and also express a considerable amount of uncertainty. That
leaves the question, then, of precisely what the target should be.
And in the language we would indicate that even though all of these
targets are tentative, this one is doubly tentative for next year.
So, we leave it there in a formalistic sense, but disavow it as having
any real operational significance at this point. The operational
significance, with further explanation, would be stated in language

7/8-9/86

presumably in the [Humphrey-Hawkins] report, and in my statement [to
Congress], that we would get more concerned over a rapid increase in
M1, if it were accompanied by rapid increases in M2 and M3.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. And the converse, too, I guess: that we
would not be particularly concerned in view of all the factors-interest rates and so forth--if a rapid increase in Ml were not
accompanied by excessive growth in M2 and M3.
Now, does that
reasonably capture the spirit or not?
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

MR. RICE.

That's mine.

MS. HORN.

Yes.

MR. GUFFEY.

That contemplates setting a range for 1987?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that contemplates setting a range
for 1987, but we'll have to discuss what range to put down for 1987.
We had two alternative proposals yesterday. One is rather pro-forma
to keep it at the 3 to 8 percent with all the reservations I
suggested, and Governor Angell resuggested a much wider range of 3 to
10 percent.
That looks so wide; it looks a little peculiar, unless we
can make it 5 to 10 percent or something. But if you want to make it
higher--

MR. BOEHNE.
Since we want to keep some link with M1, though
we don't have the foggiest notion as to what it ought to be, we ought
not to be tinkering around with the range up or down 1/2 point or a
whole point.
It makes more sense to me to keep it at 3 to 8 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think we can.
I don't think we should
fool around by a 1/2 percentage point or something like that. That
doesn't make any sense to me.
MR. ANGELL.
My view on M1 is that when you go back and look
at the data on velocity of money, historically, 6 is a very, very fast
velocity. V1 fell from over 4 for 1918 to under 2 for 1947; that was
a 29-year period that velocity dropped. And, of course-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

From when to when?

MR. ANGELL.
From 1918 to 1947 V1 fell from over 4 to under
2, and I don't know where-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That's when Milton Friedman wrote his
great tome saying there was an inexorable secular decline in velocity.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

At which point it rose from 2 to 4.

MR. ANGELL. Yes, but I believe that there is some evidence
that we've entered another period like that [earlier one].
And the
reason I want 3 to 10 percent is because I don't know when this

7/8-9/86

-47-

[policy] accommodation we've been implementing for some time might
take hold. If it does take hold, I'm not going to be satisfied to
have an 8 percent M1 growth path.
I agree with that. The point is that it could
MR. JOHNSON.
I'm just saying: Why
Who knows what it could be?
be even greater.
I would prefer not to even tinker with that.
not [leave it]?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Whatever we say for next year--I'm just
repeating myself--will be in brackets or something.
MR. JOHNSON. I would almost like to treat that 1987 target
as if we're not really taking it seriously at all until we get closer
Then we will look at it and maybe leave it there.
to that point.
Just indicate in the language that we're leaving it there, but we're
really going to address it when we get to that point.
Well, I think that would be a good idea, too.
MR. ANGELL.
I'd be glad to postpone the debate until next January or February,
because at that point in time we will have more evidence as to what
If we tend to get a decline in velocity throughout
velocity might be.
this year, then I think a case could be made for that adjustment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm inclined to think we ought to leave it
To change it requires too many
the same or leave it out.
explanations; we would have to explain both why we changed it and that
it doesn't mean much. That's putting an extra burden-MR. ANGELL. Well, I'll switch to the 3 to 8 percent real
fast then, because I want it in; I want an M1 range.
MR. BLACK. Well, the thing that bothers me, Mr. Chairman, is
That's not really
that nobody wants M1 growth of 3 to 8 percent.
As we closed yesterday, I thought
operationally very significant.
Jerry was making a very good point in arguing for wider ranges and
I personally prefer to rebase. But I'd prefer what he
higher ranges.
was suggesting to this because if by chance--and maybe it's a very
remote chance--Ml does reassume some of its previous characteristics,
we really don't have anything operational that we can do with this 3
to 8 percent target at all, but we could with a larger one. We could
try to come in under that, if that should happen.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.

For this year, you're talking about?

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
talking about next year.

I think we settled this year.

MR. BLACK. Well, I misunderstood that.
that, but I didn't realize we had settled it.

We're

I knew you suggested

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, from my perspective, the
Chairman's suggestion accommodates the concern that I had.
MR. BLACK.
making.

I guess I misunderstood the point that you were

7/8-9/86

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, we can finesse it, but the
thrust of this proposal is acceptable to me.
MR. PARRY.
It seems to me that we all are saying that we
don't have any confidence about the relationship between money and the
growth of economic activity at this time.
Therefore, I don't
understand why anyone would try to set a range for 1987 at this time.
Is there some procedural reason why it makes sense?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think the argument for doing it is
just to keep it in the ball game.
Some people feel it may be harder
to come back and set a range next year.
MR. MORRIS.
I question whether we're going to have any
better basis for setting a range next February than we do today.
MR. PARRY.

It's possible.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I think of it simply as an insurance
policy, that's all.
There could be a set of circumstances some time
between now and the end of 1987 in which we'd be darn happy to have M1
in the ball game. And if we retire it now, it's going to be hard to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But if we leave it out, I presume what we
would say is that we simply are not setting a target now and we will
re-examine-MR. PARRY.

--before year-end or something like that.

MR. JOHNSON.

Yes; we could just have language like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[Unintelligible.]

MR. GUFFEY. But if we did re-establish [an M1 range] in
February, the markets quite likely would make a lot more out of it
than if we just re-established 3 to 8 percent now and then changed it
as we looked at it in February. I would opt to leave 3 to 8 percent
in for 1987.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If I understand correctly--on the theory
that it is more important that we [not] fiddle around with it--I think
the choice is between leaving it at 3 to 8 percent or leaving it out
completely.
If we leave it at 3 and 8 percent I envision presenting
it enclosed in brackets and with an asterisk, footnoting why we have
left it unchanged for this year. We certainly feel quite open about
changing or even not having it at all next year.
MR. ANGELL.
I like the very way you said it first, with the
brackets and the asterisk and leaving it in. That gives a signal that
we are going to look at it again in February.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, let me get a preference among the
Committee members for just leaving it out or for 3 to 8 percent, with
suitable brackets, asterisks, and footnotes.
Let me take the 3 to 8
percent with brackets and asterisks.
Seven. That leaves four on the
other side.
MS. HORN.

And one of those four would be happy either way.

7/8-9/86

Since this
1, 2, and who's the other?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
isn't a big deal, can those four live with it the other way with
Let's look at the language of the directive. Well,
[unintelligible]?
we have this debt question too. Where are we on debt?
MR. KOHN. We're above the top of the range right now, at
close to 13 percent, and expect to be there through the year. Our
projection for the year is around 12, 12-1/4 percent.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KOHN.

The range is 8 to 11 percent.

Yes, 8 to 11 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Last year when we faced the same problem,
we said we were going to keep the range the same because we thought
debt was too high--that we were going to run above and we really
couldn't do much about it, but we didn't like it much. There is no
Is that
difference now, but we can make it [unintelligible].
Do we leave it there and say we are likely
acceptable again for 1986?
to run above it?
MR. ANGELL.

do?

Leave it and say we will run above it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But for next year, what are we going to
Your forecast for next year is what?
MR. KOHN.

10 percent, I think.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KOHN.

10 percent.

9-1/2 to 10 percent, or something like that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If that's what you are actually
forecasting, it would be within the range.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Look out!

MR. STERN. Why are we keeping it at all?
We don't do
anything with it.
We have all sorts of reservations and the guy who
sold it to us has bought it back!
MR. MORRIS.
all of you!

I recognize my mistakes, which is not true of

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Why don't you make some money, Frank?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. There is a little danger in that
argument because the same could be said of M2 and M3.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know if we [should] keep it.
Assuming for the moment that we keep it, given the forecast I don't
see much point in changing it next year. Or are we running too high?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Just as an aside, Mr. Kohn, I
thought the work that the staff did on debt was really quite good.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Was there anything in there that we could
use to say debt isn't quite as high as it looks?
It still has to look

7/8-9/86

-50-

high relative to GNP, but would it be within our targets with
appropriate adjustments?
MR. KOHN. No, because the double counting reduces last
year's growth rate but would actually tend to increase this year's in
the sense that there is less double counting--fewer state and local
government purchases of Treasury issues and so forth projected for
So, it is not really going to help. Adding
this year than last year.
the equity in does change things a bit.
MR. JOHNSON.

Can we make a big technological adjustment

factor?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
affect it much.

Even the equity, I suppose, wouldn't

It was close to 2 percentage points
MR. KOHN. That's right.
last year, and this year it hardly would affect anything at all.
MR. JOHNSON. If we mark-to-market relative to household
It does.
We can play the
wealth, doesn't it look a lot better?
capital gains game.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
Monday or Tuesday.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes,

It depends on whether you did that

I guess we waited too long--two days too

long.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Does anybody object to leaving it the same
I think the argument against taking it out is
as it is this year?
Personally, I
that to some extent that says we don't care about it.
do care about it--[not] in the sense that it's going to affect our
policy significantly, but I don't like to give a signal that we are
perfectly comfortable with the amount of debt being created.
MR. ANGELL.
have it in.

If the Chair wants it in, I think we ought to

I don't think it's a big deal, but it's
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
just another burden of explanation.
MR. JOHNSON.

language
in total
There is
language
kept the

I agree.

I would leave it in.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The range is 8 to 11 percent now and the
the way this is written is: "The associated range for growth
domestic nonfinancial debt was retained at 8 to 11 percent."
no acknowledgement there that it is running high. The
you showed me this morning, Mr. Kohn, was that assuming we
Ml range?
I forget.

MR. KOHN. No, the language I gave you this morning for 1987
was assuming that a range was not set.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I am looking at [the language for]
Ml now, not debt, in variant I: "In light of these uncertainties and
of the substantial decline in velocity in the first half of the year,

-51-

7/8-9/86

the Committee decided that growth in excess of the previously
[established range] would be acceptable"-MR. BOEHNE.

"Could"--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Okay, "could be acceptable"--[they begin]
I
to look the same--"depending on the behavior of velocity over"--.
was wondering whether we should break up that sentence and leave it
the way it is with a "would" or just put a period after "acceptable"
and then say "The extent of"-MR. ANGELL.

--"the overrun".

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
"Overrun" or whatever the word is "would
be acceptable to the extent that growth would continue to depend upon
the behavior of velocity, growth in the other monetary aggregates,
developments in the economy and financial markets, and potential
I'm not crazy about
inflationary pressures" or something like that.
the word "overrun."

MR. ANGELL.

"Faster growth."

MR. MORRIS.

"Such rapid growth."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We are talking about relative to the

range.
SPEAKER(?).

Relative to the [unintelligible].

MR. JOHNSON. "The extent of Ml growth relative to the
range"--well, that is still not saying over. "In excess of the
range."
MR. ANGELL.

range.

Overrun describes it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Maybe we should just forget about the
"Acceptable growth in Ml over the remainder of the year will

depend upon...."

Or we could just say "The behavior of M1 will be

judged in the light of...."
MR. ANGELL. Instead of saying "and potential inflationary
pressures" I would put "price movements."
I think we want to look at
price movements whether they are up or down.
MR. STERN. At the end of that sentence, do you want to say
something about international developments?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know whether we will have time to
vote, we have so many--! I guess they are about the same. It just
sounds a little better to say: "Acceptable growth of Ml, however, for
the remainder of the year will depend on the behavior of velocity,"-we don't have to say "over the balance of the year" because we just
said "the remainder of the year"--"growth of the other monetary
aggregates, developments in the economy and financial markets, and the
degree of inflationary pressures."
MR. ANGELL. Well, inflationary or deflationary. It seems to
me that we run the risk that someone could look back and say: These

7/8-9/86

guys don't realize that they have a deflation going on.
we ought to have a balanced approach here.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
either direction.
MR. ANGELL.

--"and price pressures."

I just think

That could be in

And price pressures.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Why don't we put that last, anyway; we
sure don't want to emphasize inflation. Now, turning to debt, I had
wording-MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, in 1984 when the same problem was
faced--that [time] it had to do with debt and M3 also--this sentence
was put in the directive: "It was anticipated that M3 and nonfinancial
debt might increase at rates somewhat above the upper limits of their
1984 ranges, given developments in the first half of the year, but the
Committee felt that higher target ranges would provide inappropriate
benchmarks for evaluating longer-term trends in M3 and credit growth."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Read that to me again.

MR. KOHN. Translating it to the situation now: "It was
anticipated that nonfinancial debt might increase at a rate somewhat
above the upper limit of its 1986 range, given developments in the
first half of the year, but the Committee felt that a higher target
range would provide an inappropriate benchmark for evaluating longerterm trends in credit growth."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, the debt measure is expected to
slow quite a bit after the first quarter.
MR. KOHN. Yes.
Well, that's partly the carryover effect of
the strong growth in December that affects the quarterly average
numbers. But we are looking at growth rates of around 10 or 10-1/2
It's
percent for the year on an end-of-period to end-of-period basis.
not really slowing all that much, going quarter by quarter.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know if this is any good,
but let me try something along these lines: "Given rapid growth in the
early part of the year, the Committee recognized that the increase in
debt in 1986 may exceed its monitoring range of 8 to 11 percent but
felt that an increase in that range would provide an inappropriate
benchmark to evaluate longer-term trends in that aggregate."
Stick
that at the end.
The directive would now read: "The Federal Open
After the sentence on
Market Committee seeks monetary growth..."
retaining the 6 to 9 percent we would go to Ml and say: "With respect
to M1, the Committee recognized that, based on the experience of
recent years, the behavior of that aggregate is subject to substantial
uncertainties in relation to economic activity and prices, depending
among other things on the responsiveness of M1 growth to changes in
interest rates.
In light of these uncertainties and of the
substantial decline in velocity in the first half of the year, the
Committee decided that growth in Ml in excess of the previously
established 3 to 8 percent range for 1986 would be acceptable.
Acceptable growth in Ml over the remainder of the year will depend on
the behavior of velocity, growth in the other monetary aggregates,
developments in the economy and financial markets, and price

7/8-9/86

Given its rapid growth in the early part of the year, the
pressures.
Committee recognized that the increase in debt in 1986 may exceed its
monitoring range, but felt that an increase in that range would
provide an inappropriate benchmark in evaluating the longer-term
trends of that aggregate."
Tne trouble with this all is that I can see that Mr. Proxmire
is going to say: You have two ranges that are meaningless. What are
you doing here?
And so forth and so on.
MR. JOHNSON. He has moderated his tone on M1 a bit, though.
I noticed when I went up for my confirmation hearing that he hit me
hard on the growth of M1.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Regardless of his tone, procedurally he
will say that we are shirking our duty by expressing such ranges.
The
defense will be: Oh no; we have ranges here for M2 and M3.
He won't
be happy, but I don't know any other way we can handle it.
MR. ANGELL.

We rely upon you to explain it.

MR. JOHNSON.

He'll put something in the Congressional

Record.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

He would say the same thing if we had no

ranges.
MR. GUFFEY.

I wonder why you use all those words?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Do you really think [we need] a
disclaimer for debt?
How far over do you think it's going to be?
MR. KOHN.

Well, we are projecting about 12-1/4 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we don't say anything, the obvious
question is: "Is it going to be within that?"
And then I say "No."
MR. MORRIS.

Well, we don't know.

The projection is fairly

close.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It is pretty close, but I don't know.
If
the projection were 11-1/2 percent, I would say "Yes."
If it were 12
percent, "I don't know."
MR. KOHN. I think we were projecting 11-1/2 percent at the
February meeting and that's probably why [the range was retained]; the
projection was close enough to the 11 percent at that time.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I am going to have to give an explanation,
anyway. I am inclined to think some explanation like this is what I
would have to say.
MR. BOEHNE.
I suppose it would be too straightforward to
raise the range to 8 to 12 percent and say that we think that's a
better fit with what's going on in the economy and in M2 and M3.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That would be a choice.
But we could
overrun that too.
These are the choices, I think: raising it, or

7/8-9/86

-54-

dropping it, [or leaving it the same].
Whether we drop it, raise it,
or leave it the same, I think we have to say something like this.
MR. ANGELL.

There might be some sentiment for just dropping

it.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

That's harder to explain.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If we drop it, then we have to add quite a
few paragraphs saying that we haven't found it very useful.
MR. JOHNSON. If we leave it and they ask questions, you
could defend yourself by responding that we haven't had good results
relating it to anything that would explain why-MR. MORRIS.

We could drop M1 on the same basis.

MR. JOHNSON. That's right, but at least there is some
historical pattern of a relationship there; there has never been-MR. BOEHNE.

There's more nostalgia too.

MR. ANGELL.

M1 is a sacred cow.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Can't think of anything else for a while,
in terms of a pure correlation-MR. JOHNSON.

I guess it's rates as well.

MR. MORRIS.
Ben Friedman sold the debt/income relationship
to me; and then it immediately went [off track].
That's why we may be
better off not taking up total liquid assets, because I'm afraid-MR. ANGELL.

[That's why] they pass sunset laws.

MR. JOHNSON. All of these things have been pretty good as
long as the relative prices didn't change. When they did-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think I'll get boxed around the
ears by Mr. Proxmire.
I guess I can survive it.
[For debt] we take
this sentence with the language [I read].
Is that right?
[For M2 and
M3] we keep 6 to 9 percent and we keep [Ml] in the table and the range
appears as 3 to 8 percent. All we say in the directive is that we are
going to exceed it.
How much we exceed it is not stated for now.
Let's vote on that as what we are going to have for 1986.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Guffey
President Horn
Governor Johnson
President Melzer
President Morris
Governor Rice
Governor Seger
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-55-

7/8-9/86

The first thing, I think, is
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Now, 1987.
"For 1987 the
that we don't put M1 in there in the paragraph.
Committee agreed on tentative

ranges

of monetary growth, measured from

the fourth quarter of 1986 to the fourth quarter of 1987 of 5-1/2 to
8-1/2 percent for M2 and M3."
I think I would put the debt last
again; I'm not sure if it's going to be 8 to 11 percent again, but I'd
Then we would say "With respect to M1 [unintelligible]."
put it last.
The sentence sounds all right.

MR. JOHNSON.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, the sentence sounds all right; but I
think if we are going to put 3 to 8 percent in the table, we have to
say something about it.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

Just say "With respect to Ml."

I would just add on to that, though, that for
MR. JOHNSON.
the time being we are carrying forward-I think we ought to leave the sentence that is
MR. ANGELL.
already in there with respect to M1.
I think the sentence that is in there is
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I'd take out the word "particularly" and I would take out
all right.
But I think we
the word "reappraisal" and just make it "appraisal."
have to say something about or precede it with "While the Committee
has plugged in"--

passive

Ml]

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
[wording].

"Carried forward" is

kind of a

MR. MELZER.
"While the tentative 3 to 8 percent range
has been carried forward, the Committee recognizes"-MR. ANGELL.

That does it.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

[for

Why did we pick 3 to

8 percent?

Because you rejected my 3 to 10 percent.

MR. MELZER.
Rather than that, why don't we say "the 3 to
percent tentative range has been carried forward"?

8

I don't know; maybe I am getting too
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
fancy.
But let me try something like this: "While the range of 3 to 8
percent for M1 in 1987 would appear appropriate in the light of most
historical experience, the Committee recognizes that the particular
uncertainties surrounding the behavior of M1 velocity over the more
recent period would require careful appraisal of the target range for
1987."
MR. ANGELL.

That's just perfect.

SPEAKER(?).

That's great.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

SPEAKER(?).

Wonderful.

A winner; that's pretty fancy.

7/8-9/86

-56-

MR. ANGELL.
It doesn't only help us with 1987;
also does something about 1986.

I think it

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I am making a big modification in my mind.
"The Committee recognized the exceptional uncertainties"--that sort of
particularizes it.
Well, does that sound all right?
Does anybody
have anything else to say? We have 5-1/2 to 8-1/2 percent for M2 and
M3.
Debt we can keep the same or make it less; it was 8 to 11
percent.
For 1987, we can keep Ml the same [as for 1986]; we are not
It
saying whether we are setting it as a tentative range or not.
depends on what we want to do.
And in the table we would put [the
range] in brackets with an asterisk. Are we ready to vote?
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Guffey
President Horn
Governor Johnson
President Melzer
President Morris
Governor Rice
Governor Seger
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

I
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We better go have a donut and return.
do think, with regard to the short run, that I personally would make
the assumption that the discount rate will be reduced in a few days.
[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't know how many of you read that
The question is whether an abbreviated version
[staff memo] on debt.
of that should be added to the Humphrey-Hawkins report as an appendix.
[Secretary's Note: Several members expressed agreement.]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
short-run posture?

Who wants to say something about the

MR. BOEHNE. Well, given all that has been said about the
economy, I'm for alternative A with a 6 percent discount rate and a
$300 million borrowing figure.
MR. PARRY.
MR. BOEHNE.

That puts the funds rate about where?
6-1/2 percent isn't it?

Or is it less?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't see any reason not to assume that
the funds rate would go down as much as the discount rate.
MR. BOEHNE.

6-3/8 percent, then.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I would support that.

Mr. Melzer.

7/8-9/86

For
MR. MELZER. Could I just clarify a procedural issue?
example, the discount rate issue aside, I would be in favor of
maintaining the existing degree of restraint. It becomes a curious
sort of thing. One could argue that what Ed just expressed a
preference for was an unchanged degree of reserve restraint, with the
$300 million borrowing target, but with a different assumption on the
I will address my comments to that, but it's a little
discount rate.
tricky in terms of how the record reads and what we ultimately vote
for, it seems to me.
MR. PARRY. But that's not an unchanged degree of restraint
if the discount rate is down and we maintain borrowing at $300
million.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. PARRY.

You would want a higher level of borrowings.
You would want a higher level of borrowings.

MR. MELZER. Yes, but I don't know how I can vote for an
action that presumes something that hasn't occurred yet.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Let me suggest something in that
connection, just in terms of clarifying the record. To me it seems
very awkward--and undesirable--to put in the directive some action
But I don't
that hasn't been taken yet, however probable it may be.
see anything the matter with making clear in the record of the meeting
that many people suggested--if that's the way it comes out--an
unchanged degree of reserve restraint on the assumption that the
discount rate is reduced and that when it is reduced, they presumably
might be in favor of a lesser degree of reserve restraint. But [there
should be] something in the record so that when people read the record
it says that decision was made in the light of an anticipated
reduction in the discount rate, without actually putting it in the
directive. Now, people may have different opinions about the discount
rate; but if that is the underlying assumption, I think that ought to
be clear in the record someplace, whatever the directive says.
MR. ANGELL. We might say "in view of the anticipated
reduction in interest rates"--it wouldn't have to be the discount
rate--in order for the $300 million borrowing number to make sense.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I would resist putting that in the
directive with [unintelligible].
MR. BOEHNE.

That's a bear trap.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But I think it can be made clear in the
policy record, if that's what we are assuming and if that were the
basis--for many people anyway--for however they voted.
MR. BOYKIN. There's a way around this, if the Board wanted
us to leave for a few minutes.
MS. SEGER.

Kill two birds with one stone.

MR. MELZER. Anyway, I'll tell you what my main concern is.
I am sensitive to some of the political considerations at this time
and also to the views of other Committee members about the

7/8-9/86

-58-

uncertainties and concerns. What concerns me the most is this: We
have just received the court ruling on Gramm-Rudman, which could have
a major effect on the psychology in the markets about deficit cuts;
and we have experienced lately a weakness in the dollar and have heard
reports about the possibility of a diminished willingness of
foreigners to hold dollar-denominated securities, given shrinking
interest rate differentials, and so forth. I think there could be a
considerable risk, because of these two developments taken together,
in our moving at this time to reduce our rates; it sounds as if it
might be unilateral, at least for a while.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I don't think it will be quite unilateral,
but it will be with minor actors rather than major actors.
MR. MELZER. That concerns me. We have been worried from
time-to-time, to a greater or lesser extent, about the risk of losing
control of the dollar on the down side. To think only about the
dollar having been under pressure maybe wouldn't be enough, but if you
take that against the backdrop of the Gramm-Rudman decision and this
being an election year, I worry a little about that psychology in the
context of what probably will be viewed as a continuing stimulative
fiscal policy and a monetary policy that moves toward further
accommodation. Beyond that, I expressed my views on the economy
before. I probably will reduce my projection but I think [the lower
growth] is still at an acceptable rate. And I would argue that with
the current borrowing target we have run a very accommodative monetary
policy. Just to pick up on your point, Wayne, about not resisting
rates adjusting to market levels: One might even argue that having
pumped in reserves at a rate of 22 percent or so over the last three
months, we might be resisting what would be a natural upward movement
in the funds rate, not a downward movement. I don't want to make a
big argument out of that particular point, but the point is that we
have been adding reserves at a very rapid rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Sorry to interrupt, but I want to raise a
procedural point. We were going to invite the Justice Department
lawyer who is defending us, hopefully, in this [Melcher] suit to come
over after lunch. But he couldn't come after lunch. I don't know
what the chances are that we will be finished by 12:30 p.m. or 12:45
p.m. today. We may run into the time of the luncheon for Mr. Axilrod.
MR. MELZER. So you want the short version! I have just two
other points. I would also question, in terms of looking at the next
six months, what impact a reduction in rates is really going to have.
I am not sure it's going to have a very significant impact in terms of
real output in the short run. The numbers that Jim gave us yesterday
on what the inflationary impact might be out in 1988--whether you
believe them or not, and I realize there are a lot of [unintelligible]
between here and there--[lead me to] think that we are getting down to
a relatively few bullets left to fire in terms of monetary policy. I
don't know where we cross that ragged edge of tipping expectations
over, but my sense is that we are getting preciously close to that.
And with that in mind, I am not sure I would trade my flexibility
right now because if this one goes through and there continue to be
weak numbers, we will get jumped again. So, I don't know where one
should make one's stand, but those would be my reasons to argue for
the existing degree of reserve restraint, alternative B.

7/8-9/86

MR. BLACK. I agree completely with Tom, but I think the
discount rate decision precludes our doing that, so I think we have no
But I think
alternative but to go with "A" or something akin to it.
his case is persuasive; we have done all we can, I think.
part.

I would like to join Tom on that too for the most
MR. RICE.
I agree with most of what he said.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. But we have a theoretical action.
If the
discount rate is reduced, we can increase the reserve restraint a
little. As for the argument about changing the discount rate and the
There is
effect on the economy, we haven't got a good choice.
If it were entirely up to us--if
obviously a lot to these arguments.
you conceive of it as I do--the question is whether we have any chance
of getting some improvement abroad. To a considerable extent, the
dilemma for us is that it may [depend] less on our policy than on
other people's policies. And this is going in reverse from the way it
I don't deny that for a minute. But it's not going to go
should go.
It is also true that we are not going to get an
without our moving.
immediate response, as near as I can see it, from the Germans and the
Japanese. But should we properly sit here and say: "Well, if you are
not going to move--and at least as aggressively or more aggressively
Where are our
than we move--we are not going to do anything"?
[Rather than] sit here saying that, we can take a
responsibilities?
chance that we can push them a little, given the risks that you
eloquently described, which I think are there. It's a question of
I don't think the change--unless it's a much
where the risks lie.
bigger one--is going to have any very significant effect on our shortrun or intermediate-term business outlook. Does it have an effect on
theirs?
It goes in that direction. Maybe it's not very powerful;
It's the
it's a pretty weak reed, but it's the only reed we have.
only argument we can make.
MR. JOHNSON.
I agree wholeheartedly with what you are
saying. I think that's the whole issue. It's almost a feeling of
[That's been the case]
being held hostage by our trading partners.
for almost five years now, really. How long are we going to stay
hostage in that situation when at some point we have various domestic
concerns? You are right; there is the risk that you described. But I
I agree that a half point on the discount
am a bit more optimistic.
rate, if it's followed by a $300 million borrowed reserve level, is
Still, I think it's more
not going to change the world by any means.

than just hitting the interest-sensitive sectors that are already
running almost full out. It was pointed out by the staff that to some
extent the lower interest rates have been offset by tax reform and
that the cost of capital really has been relatively unchanged. And I
think we could affect that efficiency of investment at the margin with
an interest rate decline. As you say, it's not going to change the
world; but it certainly could do more for new orders than what we have
been seeing. That's the way I am looking at it--that hopefully it
could add some pressure at the margin--even though it sounds like we
are going to have to wait until the fall.
MR. RICE.

Maybe a 1 percent discount rate reduction would do

more.
MR. JOHNSON. There's no doubt about that. The only other
I don't think
point would be the additional psychological [effect].

7/8-9/86

we want to look panicky; we want to look confident in what
doing and not like we made a mistake and now are trying to
of the ball game. But you are right; a 1 percent discount
reduction would exert more pressure abroad if it affected
actions], but if they chose not to-MR. RICE.

we are
get ahead
rate
[their

And do more about the cost of capital.

MR. JOHNSON.

That's right.

MR. RICE.
If we really want to do something, or if we think
that we have things to do that we should do-MR. JOHNSON. Yes, but I think we have to draw the line too
on the potential.
I agree with that.
MR. RICE.

I just don't think we need to--

MR. JOHNSON. That obviously can be carried to the extreme,
to the point where one has done too much.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I have a practical question.
I
don't know how we can resolve it here.
If the discount rate does go
down and the constellation of psychology is such that the dollar gets
in a lot of trouble and the others don't move, there's a question of
whether the assumption we make here should be changed in the market.
MR. STERN. Or, we could nudge up the borrowing target a bit
initially, particularly on the argument that over time we would like
to see more done abroad than here.
It sort of sets the stage for
that, at least initially, and then we can play it from that position.
MR. RICE.

But we wouldn't get the reduction in the funds

rate.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. STERN.

We would have a growing disparity-It would come up in the middle somewhere.

MR. JOHNSON. That's the problem. There would be a growing
disparity between the funds rate and the discount rate and we would
have to [unintelligible] if we wanted to-MR. STERN. The funds rate would be at a somewhat lower level
than it is today, but we wouldn't let the full 50 basis point
[reduction in the discount rate] show through.
MR. JOHNSON.

No, but the gap would widen.

MR. STERN. Yes, the gap would widen; that's right.
And that
might be a little initial insurance on the performance of the dollar.
MR. JOHNSON. The only problem is that
interpreted very bearishly.

I think that might be

MR. MORRIS.
I think the foreign exchange market has already
discounted, largely, a 1/2 point reduction. A one percentage point
reduction would surprise them. Gretchen, what is your view on this?

7/8-9/86

Certainly, a one percentage point reduction would be a surprise in the
foreign exchange market; but what about a 1/2 point reduction?
MS. GREENE. I think you have to distinguish between what the
market is expecting and the announcement effect even when an expected
I think the market is pretty much expecting a 1/2
action is taken.
point reduction, but the announcement of a 1 percentage point drop
would have an immediate impact, particularly if what happens here
comes sooner than the market might have thought.
I think the market--or at least a
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
good part of the market--also thinks that a half point would be more
coordinated than what we are talking about right now.
MR. RICE.

I'm sorry, I didn't understand.

I think the market probably expects
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
that, if we come down a half point, at least one of the other two
major countries would do the same.
MR. JOHNSON.
I think the expectation is that Japan may do
something.
They don't seem to be indicating that they want to do
But
something, which may be of some surprise in the exchange market.
that's the whole question.
MR. MORRIS.
If there were a major decline in the dollar,
wouldn't that put very heavy pressure on the Germans and the Japanese
to go along with this reluctantly?
MR. ANGELL.
Absolutely. Japan is going to be in there
intervening and, of course, whether or not that does any good remains
to be seen. But if they don't do any good with intervention--if they
sterilize all of their intervention--they will end up having some very
So, we put some pressure
low yielding returns in the United States.
on them.
It seems to me that the elasticity of their exports in
regard to their exchange rates is much more sensitive than ours,
[unintelligible] improvement of our balance of trade. So it seems to
me that Japan eventually will have a jolt if they do not take action.
MR. JOHNSON.
for a real ride.

They would be setting their domestic economy up

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The danger in the whole situation--and I
don't know how to avoid it--is that if we do have a real decline in
the dollar and they are not very eager to act, their business outlook
may deteriorate from what it is now.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. ANGELL.

I think it will.
That's correct.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
If they don't act, then we are worse off.
But I think that's not demonstrable until it happens.
MR. JOHNSON.

Right.

MR. ANGELL.
But it seems to me that with a cut in [our]
discount rate at this point, when the market finds out that Japan and

-62-

7/8-9/86

Germany haven't cut theirs we could expect some real pressure on the
I don't see how that can be avoided. But
yen to appreciate further.
that does put pressure where it belongs; and I think that they will be
rational people and, in that environment, that they will move.
If they continue not to move and if they let
MR. JOHNSON.
their economic situation deteriorate domestically, at some point we
conceivably could end up in a situation like 1983, when they were
lagging so badly and our stimulative effects actually led to a
strengthening of the dollar. Boy, we would really get a trade problem
In other words, it could be perceived that they were
out of that!
getting so weak that it would weaken their own currency. And then we
would have a strengthening dollar in a situation of the United States
It might be a
moving [toward ease] relative to those countries.
double whammy on the trade side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I think what we are saying is that
all of this isn't very predictable.
MR. ANGELL.

But I will go with alternative A.

I don't know what alternative A really
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I guess I don't have much faith in projecting these numbers to
means.
I take it that it ought to mean $300 million to-the last percent.
It means the $300 million; I don't think we
MR. ANGELL.
If we lowered that to
ought to change the degree of reserve pressure.
$200 million, I think it would be a little more difficult to run the
Desk than keeping $300 million.
It certainly becomes a trickier process to try
MR. THIEKE.
to control the relationships at that level of borrowing.
MR. ANGELL. So to me it would make sense for us to keep the
$300 million--maintain the same pressure that we have had--and do what
we want to do with the discount rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, that's the way I come out, Mr.
Chairman.
I am not sure what alternative A means in terms of these
Bluebook specifications, but I do think there is a case domestically
for monetary accommodation--even though it is not going to cure all of
I have been preaching
the problems in every sector of the economy.
So, I think
patience for a long time but my patience is running out.
we need to try to give the economy a little kick, and I would do it
through a lowering of the discount rate to 6 percent. And I would
If the Board doesn't lower the
keep the borrowing at $300 million.
discount rate, then we have to come down to a frictional level of
I think that
borrowing if we are going to provide more accommodation.
would not be desirable, so I would like to see a discount rate cut and
$300 million of borrowing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

I am
I am for a $300 million borrowing level.
MS. HORN.
assuming a 50 basis point drop in the discount rate, essentially for

-63-

7/8-9/86

the international reasons--the effort to get into that business a
little and see how things develop.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Seger.

I am for alternative A with a $300 million
MS. SEGER.
I do think
borrowing target and a swift cut in the discount rate.
that lower rates would have some beneficial effects on the economy,
particularly in the capital spending area. With the changes coming
from tax reform--assuming they materialize--there would be lower
returns on investment.
Therefore, to the extent that funds can be
borrowed at a lower rate, that would increase the number of projects
that become feasible; so, I think it would have that impact.
Also, I
think it would make it easier for debtors to carry their existing debt
burdens at lower rates, whether they are farmers or home buyers or
So, I favor "A."
whatever.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY.
I would favor the recommendation of Bob Forrestal
and Karen Horn: reducing the discount rate by 50 basis points and
maintaining the borrowings at $300 million.
I hope that we would
characterize that as a lesser degree of reserve restraint because it
is.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

MR. JOHNSON. As a matter of fact, what funds rate would be
It should be about the same as
consistent with that in your opinion?
the discount rate, but I just wondered if the-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY.
I would be counted in the alternative A
with a discount rate decrease and $300 million on borrowing.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

[camp]

Anybody else have anything to say?

MR. JOHNSON. May I?
I don't know if I expressed my [view].
I'm for alternative A, which is a $300 million level on borrowing.
MR. RICE. If we weren't going to reduce the discount rate, I
would be in favor of alternative B.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

So would I.

MR. RICE.
But given the reduction, I would have to go along
with alternative A.
I don't know yet how I am going to vote on the
discount rate.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Anybody else want to say anything?
We
have some other issues.
One is how to express all this.
I think we
are interpreting alternative A very loosely at this point, until I get
instructed [by you] otherwise. Why don't we look at the directive?
I
don't know how to interpret the sentiment [on borrowing] if the
discount rate were not reduced.
Those people who have said a $300
million borrowing level, would they be inclined to say less than a

7/8-9/86

$300 million borrowing level?
I am not sure that's the preferable
course; I am not suggesting that.
I just want to get theoretically-MR. GUFFEY.
concerned.

The answer to that is "yes,"

as far as I am

MR. FORRESTAL. Yes, it would be for me too.
But I think you
pointed out the practical problem. What do we do with a frictional
borrowing level of $150 million?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I just want to make sure that I'm not
imposing something on you. People are saying--if they think we ought
to be making some move in the easing direction--that it should come
preferably through the discount rate rather than a lowering of the
borrowing.
MR. JOHNSON.

It makes a lot more sense.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I suppose the question that arises right
in the first sentence--there is an awful lot of crossing out [in the
draft and] it is a little hard to read.
There may be some ambiguity,
however much we explain it.
[We can] explain it in the overall record
but there is still some question, technically.
If we say unchanged
borrowings, is that the same as saying unchanged degree of pressure on
reserve positions?
If not, I don't know how to reword this without
saying the discount rate is-MR. PARRY. Just say that we are going to try to achieve a
lesser degree of reserve restraint. For practical purposes, that
[discount rate reduction] causes the funds rate to go down 50 basis
points.
MR. JOHNSON.
SPEAKER(?).

Do we have to quote a borrowed reserve target?
No, we never do; just leave it out.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. The first sentence is still a
problem because, as always, it says "maintain" or "increase" or
"decrease."
That is the-MR. MORRIS.
Couldn't we have a sentence in there saying that
we interpret the same level borrowing with a lowered discount rates to
mean a lessening in reserve pressures?
SPEAKER(?).

We have a reserve--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

We can say that in the overall record.

MR. JOHNSON. I think the thing to do is to leave the
sentence as we have it in the beginning and say "decrease somewhat the
degree of pressure on reserve positions."
We are not reporting the
borrowed reserves target, so-MR. ANGELL.

Because we are decreasing it from where it was.

MR. JOHNSON. If we actually published the $300 million
borrowed reserves target, it would be hard to interpret that as a
decrease in reserve pressures. But if we are not reporting the

7/8-9/86

borrowed reserves target and say "decrease reserve pressures
somewhat," then-VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Let's say: "The Committee seeks one
way or another to decrease reserve pressures."
That is just saying that the
MR. JOHNSON. That's right.
Committee is reducing reserve pressures and it is not saying how.
SPEAKER(?).

I think that is all we've got to do.

SPEAKER(?).

I agree with that.

SPEAKER(?).

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How can we say [the Committee] decreased
reserve pressures? Maybe the Federal Reserve System did, but the
Committee did not.
MR. JOHNSON.

But since we--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we took the opposite course.
the implementation of open market operations for the immediate
future"--

"In

That has the elements working against each other.

MR. BLACK.

MR. ANGELL. Well, we could say "maintained [the existing
degree of pressure on reserve positions], consistent with lower
patterns of interest rates."
MR. JOHNSON.
these years.

That is what we have been trying to avoid all

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have been trying to avoid being
specific about a borrowing target and being specific about interest
rates.
The consensus
Couldn't we approach it this way?
MR. BLACK.
If
of the group seems to be that we want to ease reserve pressures.
tomorrow the Board approves a cut in the discount rate, then we do it
one way; if the Board doesn't, then we do it with a lower borrowed
reserve target. The Committee doesn't have to address that at this
point. As Manley said, I think all we need to put in there is
"decrease."
Since we never specify our borrowed reserve target in any
of these-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, presumably we would say if
[unintelligible] exactly the same borrowings.
It is going to be
confusing as the devil to people.
MR. ANGELL.
The reason we would have the same borrowings
would be because after we voted to decrease reserve pressures somewhat
the Board lowered the discount rate.
That would make it necessary to
go back and-MR. RICE.

We don't hit the borrowing target exactly anyway--

-66-

7/8-9/86

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

We are only off by $15 million.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, there is a very precise way to say it: "In
the implementation of policy, etc., the Committee seeks to decrease
somewhat the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions given
the current discount rate:" or alternatively, "seeks to maintain the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions given a decline in
the discount rate."
MR. ANGELL.

We said ["maintain"]

in December.

If the discount
MR. JOHNSON. That is actually not true.
rate is lowered, we are not maintaining the same degree of reserve
pressure.
If you
MR. BOEHNE. Well, it depends on how you define it.
If you define it in terms
define it in terms of borrowings, we are.
of the amount of reserves put into open market-MR. JOHNSON.

You are right.

But we have to spell it out

then.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Suppose we just added on here: "In the
implementation of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks
to decrease somewhat the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions, taking account of the possibility of a decline in the
discount rate."
MR. BOEHNE.

That's the way to do it.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. We could even just say "taking
account of the level of the discount rate."
That covers the
possibility that the Board, in its wisdom, doesn't want to lower the
discount rate.
MR. BOEHNE. We are taking account of possible changes in the
discount rate.
That's the way to do it.
MR. KOHN. Mr. Chairman, you could say something about easier
conditions in reserve markets to get away from this "degree of
pressure" language that seems to be confusing. For example: "The
Committee seeks somewhat easier conditions in reserve markets taking
account of etc."
In the past "pressures" has been a stand-in for the
borrowing objective. We have said "maintain" even when the discount
rate has gone down or been about to go down before and that would show
through in the federal funds rate.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
was the best idea.

What was your language again?

It

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. To just say "decrease the existing degree
of pressure on reserve positions taking account of the possibility of
a change in the discount rate."
MR. ANGELL. That is fine.
That hits the spot.
quite the level of writing you did earlier, but--

It is not

7/8-9/86

-67-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I think it can be explained in the policy
I
record.
"For growth in M2 and M3 over the period as a whole--".
would resist going from [the existing language of] annual rates of
about 8 to 10 percent, which are nice [round] numbers, to whatever we
have [in the Bluebook]--8-3/4 percent and 7-3/4 percent.
MR. BOEHNE.

7 to 9 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

7 to 9 percent.

That's fine.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If you want to dissent, dissent now.
Well, let me try something on the Ml, since I think it is consistent
with what we just said.
Instead of putting in a number for Ml, what
if we say "Growth in M1 will be judged in part in light of changes in
M2 and M3," or something like that?
I suppose there is some chance
that if we put in this high number for Ml, we'll come in below it.
We
are starting July pretty low; on the other hand, if we come in way
above-MR. ANGELL. Yes, with a cut in the discount rate--if the
elasticity of the demand for money is anything like it has been--we
are probably going to get another boost.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I will accept that. There is a good
chance that it will come in way below or way above.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, your language doesn't pin us down to a

number.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. How about saying: "The growth of M1
is expected to moderate from its extraordinary pace in the second
quarter.
Its behavior will be evaluated in the light of..."
I don't
think we want to leave the message that a 20 percent growth rate or
something-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KOHN.

I think it was about 17-1/2 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
moderate somewhat"-MR. ANGELL.

What was it in the second quarter?

"While growth in M1 is expected to

We've been wrong before.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
--"it will continue to be judged in the
light of the behavior of M2 and M3 and other factors."
All right.
I
don't see anything the matter in general with the proposal that Mr.
Kohn or somebody made here in capital letters: "Somewhat greater
reserve restraint" etc.
That about covers it.
It doesn't say what to
do if we get strength in the business expansion and powerful
developments in the exchange markets.
MR. JOHNSON.
It still leaves uncertain what we would do in a
situation where M1 continued to explode and M2 and M3 did okay and the
economy kept declining.
I am just saying that is not covered in here;
I hope we don't have to face that.

7/8-9/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It is covered by inference. We're not
going to pay much attention to Ml, if it is not confirmed by M2 and
M3.
MR. JOHNSON. Well, I was just thinking about this one
sentence here that says: "Somewhat lesser restraint might be
acceptable in the context of a marked slowing in money growth and
pronounced sluggishness in economic performance."
SPEAKER(?).
MR. JOHNSON.

That's out.
All that in the brackets comes out?

I see.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We still have the question of "woulds" or
"mights."
I would make it the same for both. Any preference between
"would" and "might"?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

I would make both "might."

I think that is the safest.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A final issue is the federal funds rate
range, which we changed to 5 to 9 percent last time. The midpoint of
5 to 9 percent is 7 percent.
MR. ANGELL.

This will take us down to 6 percent to--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Obviously, we are going to be well within
this range, but I don't know where.
MR. BOEHNE.

Would 4 to 8 percent be consistent with it?

MR. ANGELL.

Let's say 4 to 8 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. MELZER.
MR. ANGELL.
[unintelligible].

4 to 8 percent or 5 to 9 percent.

How about 3 to 10 percent?
That combination does not apply with the world

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

How about 5 to 8 percent?

MR. JOHNSON. 5 to 8 percent doesn't really fly.
don't know; I guess it is getting closer to the range.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Well, I

We could make that big policy change of

narrowing the range all the way to 3 percentage points!
MR. PARRY.

I don't understand what

you accomplish by doing

that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It goes half way to 4 to 8 percent and it
It is
does center the range sort of where we expect the rate to be.
closer to the center of what we want.
MR. ANGELL.

So just leave it the same, 5 to 9 percent.

69-

7/8-9/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Leave it the same?

MR. FORRESTAL. If we change it, we might be suggesting that
we anticipated a discount rate change.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

We already did that.

It is spelled out.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have already said that we are
anticipating a decrease by the words "taking account of a discount
And we are saying if the discount rate doesn't change,
rate change."
In no-we want an easing of pressures.
MR. PARRY.
interpreted?

How would a narrowing of the range be

MR. BLACK.

That we are moving closer toward a federal funds

MS. SEGER.

Typographical error!

target.

I don't think we ought to tell anybody what we

MR. ANGELL.
are doing!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I don't think it could be interpreted as

much--

MR. PARRY. I think there probably will be about three
articles in the financial journals talking about it, saying we are
getting closer to interest rate targeting or something like that.
MR. BLACK.
MR. RICE.

That's the main significance.
It might be interpreted as tightening.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
I would leave it the way it is, but
I really don't care. There are three possibilities: 4 to 8 percent, 5
to 8 percent, or 5 to 9 percent.
MR. PARRY.

Let's vote.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
be more than one-third.
MR. JOHNSON.

Who prefers 4 to 8 percent?

It's going to

I'll throw my vote in.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who prefers 5 to 9 percent?
Who prefers 5
to 8 percent?
You really want 4 to 8 percent?
Okay, put in 4 to 8
"In the implementation
Should I read all this over again?
percent.
of policy for the immediate future, the Committee seeks to decrease
the existing degree of pressure on reserve positions, taking account
of the possibility of a change in the discount rate. Growth in M2 and
M3 over the period from June to September is expected to be at annual
rates of 7 to 9 percent. While growth in M1 is expected to moderate
somewhat from the exceptionally large increase during the second
quarter, that growth will continue to be judged in the light of the
behavior of M2 and M3.
Somewhat greater or lesser reserve restraint

-70-

7/8-9/86

might be acceptable depending upon the behavior of the
And we have 4 to 8 percent [for the funds rate
aggregates...etc."
range].
If there are no other comments, we will vote.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Guffey
President Horn
Governor Johnson
President Melzer
President Morris
Governor Rice
Governor Seger
Governor Wallich
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

I guess we are finished.
END OF MEETING

