Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee
April 1, 1986

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
in Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, April 1, 1986 at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr. Volcker, Chairman
Mr. Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Mr. Angell
Mr. Guffey 1/
Mrs. Horn
Mr. Johnson
Mr. Melzer
Mr. Morris
Mr. Rice
Ms. Seger
Mr. Wallich
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, Keehn, and Stern, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Black, Forrestal, and Parry, Presidents of the Federal
Reserve Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Axilrod, Staff Director and Secretary
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mrs. Steele, Deputy Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, 2/ General Counsel
Mr. Kichline, Economist
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Balbach, J. Davis, R. Davis, T. Davis,
Kohn, Lindsey, Prell, and Siegman,
Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

1/
2/

Left meeting after action to approve minutes of February meeting and
reentered before action to adopt domestic policy directive.
Entered meeting before action to adopt domestic policy directive.

4/1/86

Mr. Coyne,l/ Assistant to the Board of Governors
Mr. Roberts,1/ Assistant to the Chairman, Board of Governors
Mr. Gemmill, Staff Adviser, Division of International
Finance, Board of Governors
Mrs. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Broaddus, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum, Scheld,
Scadding, and Ms. Tschinkel, Senior Vice Presidents,
Federal Reserve Banks of Richmond, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, Chicago, San Francisco, and
Atlanta, respectively
Mr. McNees, and Ms. Clarkin, Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Boston and New York, respectively

1/

Entered meeting after action to approve minutes of'February meeting.

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting of
April 1, 1986
MR. WALLICH. I nominate Paul Volcker as Chairman.
another choice?
I take it that the motion is approved.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Vice Chairman, too.

I haven't heard any objection.

Is there

We need a

MR. WALLICH. I nominate Gerald Corrigan to serve as Vice
Chairman of the Committee for the year ahead. Is there a second?
SPEAKER(?).

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Vice Chairman.

Without objection, Mr. Corrigan will be

MR. BLACK. You didn't give us enough time, Mr. Chairman.
We'd have objections to that one!
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have a list of
you want to read the list, Mr. Bernard?

[proposed]

officers.

Do

MR. BERNARD.
Staff Director and Secretary, Stephen Axilrod
Assistant Secretary, Normand Bernard
Deputy Assistant Secretary, Nancy Steele
General Counsel, Michael Bradfield
Deputy General Counsel, James Oltman
Economist, James Kichline
Economist (International), Edwin Truman
Associate Economists from the Board:
Donald Kohn;
David Lindsey;
Michael Prell; and
Charles Siegman.
Associate Economists from the Reserve Banks:
Anatol Balbach, proposed by President Melzer;
John Davis, proposed by President Horn;
Richard Davis, proposed by President Corrigan;
Thomas Davis, proposed by President Guffey; and
Alicia Munnel, proposed by President Morris.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
appropriate?

Do we have a motion, if that's

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

Is it seconded?

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. Do we have a motion on
the redesignation of the New York Reserve Bank as agent [for the
System Open Market Account]?
SPEAKER(?).

So moved.

4/1/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MS.

SEGER.

I did hear a second someplace!

I'll second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Without objection. We have Mr. Sternlight
and Mr. Cross as Managers, with the concurrence of the New York Bank I
assume. No objections to that.
You have a series of what are listed
on my agenda as policy instruments. We renew those once a year.
I
assume everybody has had a chance to look at them and I don't know of
any questions being raised. With no objections, those are approved.
There's one item that may not be on your agenda. We need one member
of the Committee and an alternate to serve for Freedom of Information
appeals.
I understand this is not terribly burdensome; there haven't
been any appeals from 1978 to 1985.
But there is now an appeal
pending, I understand. Governor Rice serves in that function with
Governor Johnson as an alternate for the Board of Governors, and it
may be convenient just to have them also serve for the Committee if
that's all right with them and all right with the Committee. Hearing
no objections--apparently there's an appeal on which you will have to
rule.
Now we're through with the annual organizational work. We can
I'm
Oh, wait a minute!
go to foreign currency operations, Mr. Cross.
sorry. We have to approve the minutes [of the previous meeting].
Is
there a motion on the minutes?
MS. SEGER.
SPEAKER(?).

I'll move them.
Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. CROSS.

Without objection.

Mr. Cross.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Any questions or comments?

MS. SEGER. Did you see the article in The New York Times
Sunday by Bergsten suggesting that the yen should appreciate still
further to about 150?
MR. CROSS.
Well, Bergsten has been saying that for a long,
long time.
If you look strictly at trade considerations and
competitive considerations, that's what seems to be influencing his
thinking. But of course, the other side of the question is that there
are a lot of other elements that enter into the balance of payments
other than trade--particularly these capital movements. That's why I
mentioned the point about the continued narrowing of the interest rate
differentials.
That's the other side of the problem in this.
MS. SEGER.

You don't think he has a very typical view then?

MR. CROSS.
Well, no.
I would say that if you just look at
the trade position and the competitive position you can come to one
conclusion about where the dollar ought to be.
Obviously, we still
have a very substantial trade deficit.
I think all the economists
would agree that we haven't begun to see much of the benefits of the
exchange rate changes that already have taken place. And that would
provide some considerable improvement to our trade position.
But we
have an enormous trade deficit to deal with.
If you're looking at it
strictly from that viewpoint, you could persuade yourself that a

4/1/86

[unintelligible] very substantial, and even the very large
devaluations and depreciations that we've seen are not going to
eliminate the trade deficit.
But you can also argue that you can't
expect to eliminate all of this huge trade deficit purely by exchange
rate moves. There have to be other things in there, such as growth in
the other countries. And you also have to watch very carefully the
effects of this on capital flows and whether the kind of exchange rate
movements he's talking about may lead to great problems for us on the
capital side.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You can quote some economists, or one
anyway, who says the rate has to get down to 100 yen to the dollar.
MS.

SEGER.

Ooh!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Not right tomorrow, but he kind of makes
it tomorrow. That's the most extreme.
MS.

SEGER.

I thought 160 was a little extreme;

100 is worse.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Any other comments or questions?
haven't had any transactions.
MR. CROSS.

We

No, we haven't had any transactions.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Sternlight.
[Statement--see Appendix.]
Questions?

MR. MELZER. Peter, there's no evidence in the funds market
I guess with the quarter-end-of the change to daylight overdrafts?
MR. STERNLIGHT.
It has been smothered over by the impact of
the quarter-end, as you mentioned President Melzer.
But our
impression, both from seeing that activity on Thursday and from a
number of conversations with funds managers, is that it was no great
problem. I think they saw it coming and were pretty well prepared for
it.
We did get the sense that some of the rise in excess reserves in
the past few months was already foreshadowing this greater attention
to the overdraft potential.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Yes, there was some suggestion that
the problems that occurred on Thursday may have been related to the
caps, but that was not true. One of the big banks had a CHIPS problem
that kept us up late again, but it had nothing whatever to do with
caps.
MR. JOHNSON. Peter, what's the normal spread between the
funds rate and the 3-month bill rate?
It's about a point now, and I
just wondered.
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, it normally would be less than that.
I think it's fair to say that bills are currently priced with an
expectation of the funds rate being lower than the recent 7-3/8
percent--call it, on average maybe 7-1/8 or 7 percent, or something
like that.
I'm not sure there's any one single figure that is normal,

4/1/86

but I think the spread now is toward the wide side of what has been a
typical range.
It maybe centers around 1/2 a point or something like
that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. If there are no other questions, we will
turn to Mr. Kichline. Oh, wait a minute!
We have to ratify the
transactions.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MS.

SEGER.

I'll move it.

Second.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Without objection.

Mr. Kichline.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Jim, I was curious as to why you're
projecting further depreciation of the dollar over the last Greenbook.
Is it basically lower interest rates, or what?
MR. KICHLINE.

Do you mind if I let my colleague answer?

MR. TRUMAN.
It's partly just in recognition of the fact that
the dollar had already reached a lower level than we were projecting
at the time of the last Greenbook. The other part of it is that, with
the lower interest rates, we felt that it made more sense to assume
somewhat more depreciation.
MR. MELZER.

You assume 20 percent over the year--

MR. TRUMAN.

Most of that, or half of that, we've already

MR. MELZER.

What about 1987?

had.

MR. TRUMAN.
[Another] 5 percent.
In 1987 the level at the
end of the forecast period is roughly 10 percent lower than we had [in
the last Greenbook].
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You are using the assumption of $16 for
the oil price.
It's an area where nobody knows.
But what would the
price of oil sold in the United States today be?
Do you have any
idea?
MR. TRUMAN. The posted prices, I think, are a little less
than that now; my understanding is they are in the $15 or $16 range.
Mike says $12-$15.
That's not the spot price but the price at which
the large companies will buy.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, this is the time for any commentary
that the Committee members might want to make on the business scene.
Mr. Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE.
I think this is one of those times when you have
to decide whether you trust what you can see and touch here and now,
or whether you trust your ability to look ahead. Normally, I come
down on the side of trusting what I can see here and now. And what I
see is clearly modest growth: not terrible, not great, but somewhere

-5-

4/1/86

in between--very unspectacular. But I think this is not a normal
Therefore, I am inclined to put more weight on what we think is
time.
going to happen down the line. Jim has ticked off the familiar
reasons for that; but it does seem to me that this is a very unusual
loading of the gun with a lot of economic fire power. We have a
The drop in
number of things coming together that are rather unusual.
long-term rates just since the beginning of the year has been around
200 basis points. Now, we know that takes a lag to affect the
economy. We are seeing the effect where one would expect to see it
The value of the dollar has shown a big
first: in the housing market.

drop of 30 percent; there's not a whole lot [yet] to see there, but at
least some of the people in my District say that while the orders are
not coming in, certainly the interest from foreign buyers is there and
they see the beginnings of that process. A factor which was not
mentioned is the huge run-up in stock prices. We have had a 25
percent run-up in stock prices this year and that, to say nothing of
oil prices, has to have a positive impact on consumer spending.
Admittedly, we are in a sluggish period; there isn't a lot of hard
evidence to hang one's hat on. But it just seems to me that we have
this confluence of factors that are so large and potentially so
powerful that I come down on the side of thinking that the second half
of the year will be a good bit stronger than the first half.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Melzer.

MR. MELZER. One aspect that has not been mentioned, with
respect to lower interest rates and their effect on housing, is the
tremendous amount of refinancing that is going on. In terms of
anecdotal evidence, I have heard of some of our branch directors
talking in terms of having 6, 8, 10 people on the phone just to take
names and say: We'll call you back about your request. In due course
I think this is going to affect cash flow of consumers quite
significantly. An interesting comment we picked up from a retailer
was that he felt that was a factor that was really holding down retail
sales in the short run as people incurred the front-end costs of
refinancing. And, of course, the benefits in terms of the cash flow
will be spread out over time. I would say in general that in the
Eighth District the situation looks pretty good. We have the same
mixed picture but some retailers we talked to have seen gains of
almost 10 percent on a year-to-year basis in their sales. Auto sales
are clearly slow, although the manufacturing that we have in our
District seems to be in models that are not backed up in terms of
inventories, so there is not an anticipation of big employment
cutbacks there. In terms of new housing, again, that is somewhat
mixed. But in the better areas, St. Louis and Louisville in
particular, home builders are looking for 15 to 20 percent year-toyear gains. I would say the same thing that Ed was saying: It's
strange that the data we have seen lately on the economy and how it is
doing right now are quite poor, and yet I sense in just talking to
people that in general there is a lot more confidence about the
outlook right now than there was a month or two ago when we were
seeing much better current data.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. I agree both with Ed and Tom. I am puzzled as to
why we haven't seen more strength in the economic numbers. If someone
had told me four months ago where oil prices would be and where

4/1/86

interest rates would be today, I certainly would have predicted a
different overall level of economic activity than we find today.
I
continue to expect strength as I look around me in the District.
I
see a reasonable amount of confidence in the District; nobody is
complaining, really. Both the fall in the exchange rate and the lower
interest rates are expected to have some spillover into the heavy
capital goods industry by the people in those industries in my
District.
In the steel industry we have seen an improvement in
margins and orders, which may be related to labor negotiations even
though they are done company by company this year. There are old
habits of purchasing agents that still may be in effect, so we don't
know how real that is in the steel industry at this time. Our bankers
are reporting, as are Tom's, this extremely high level of activity.
In the Fourth District it is more in the refinancing area than the new
building area.
We see that heavy refinancing on the commercial side
as well. Again, the new activity in that area is not so strong where
our builders are expressing more and more concern about the overhang.
All in all, I guess I agree with this general attitude of confidence
that I see around my District.
I continue to expect strength in the
economy, so I don't know whether to characterize my stance as watchful
patience or watchful concern.
On the concern side, I think that we
will have some time to react if the economic numbers come in weaker in
the future than I expect.
Maybe [unintelligible] is all but the
municipal sector; those folks aren't very happy with the prospect of
the federal budget deficit reduction.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, I would describe activity in
the Sixth District as improving since the end of the year. We did
have a downturn in the fourth quarter, but in general things are
looking up and I think the outlook is quite promising. What perhaps
is more interesting and more encouraging is the fact that growth would
seem to be more balanced as the manufacturing sector, particularly
textiles and apparels, get some of the benefits of a declining dollar
and lower interest rates.
Employment is generally up around the
District, and unemployment is down except in the energy stricken area
of Louisiana where I understand that the unemployment rate is now the
highest in the United States. The services sector continues to be
very good.
The weak spots in addition to energy, which is affecting
basically Louisiana and southern Alabama, are in the agricultural and
commercial real estate sectors.
We have increasingly high vacancy
rates in the major cities of the Southeast but, interestingly, the
building continues to go on. Where there has been some slackening of
commercial real estate development, it seems to have spilled over into
the light industry development.
In a more general sense we have not changed our outlook very
much; I agree with the others who said that the current information
looks a little disappointing but there seems to be an awful lot in the
pipeline that would indicate that activity in the second half of the
year is going to be considerably better. We basically agree with the
Greenbook. I think that some of the disappointment that we are seeing
in the numbers is due to the cutbacks in oil-related activities and
sharp price cuts before the stimulus of those lower prices gets into
the pipeline. The business people that I talk to around the District
are extremely optimistic, and I stress "extremely."
I don't hear any
pessimistic talk at all.
Toward the end of the year, just after

4/1/86

Christmas, people were beginning to murmur a little about a national
recession.
I hear nothing at all about that; people seem to be paying
a lot of attention to the low energy prices, the stock market rally,
and the bond [market] rally.
So there is a good deal of confidence.
Whether that will spill over into increased business fixed
The other thing I
investments, I think it is a little early to tell.
hear less about these days is the impact of the declining dollar;
people are not talking about that as much. We do hear sporadic
reports of higher prices; we heard from someone the other day, for
example, who indicated that [prices of] imports of machinery are
beginning to increase. This is machinery from Japan and due to the
fact that this contact is now locked into that Japanese market he
finds this very disturbing. But these reports of higher prices are
very, very spotty. In general, things in our area are pretty good,
except for the one or two areas related to energy and agriculture.
In
terms of a policy prescription, all of this would indicate to me that
perhaps we ought to sit back and pause for a little while.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, although recent statistics
certainly present a mixed picture of the economy, I believe that the
fundamentals will produce a relatively strong pickup in the second
half. Our forecast for the second half of the year is a little less
robust than the Board staff's forecast, but I think that is due to the
fact that we do not have the dollar declining as sharply as the Board
staff's forecast does.
Plus, we do not have the same term structure
adjustment that produces as low long-term rates as in their forecast.
In any case, we are expecting real growth to average roughly 3 percent
for 1986 and a similar growth rate for 1987.
Our inflation rates are
quite similar. We don't have as much of an increase in inflation in
1987 but I think that again is probably due to the difference in
assumptions about the value of the dollar between us and the Board's
staff.
As for developments in the District, I think there is basic
strength in the Twelfth District but the picture is still somewhat
mixed. We do have weakness continuing in agriculture, and energy has
imparted a lot of weakness in certain areas of California and has
produced very bad effects in Alaska. But in the forest products area,
where we have had nothing but weakness in the last several years, we
are beginning to hear more optimistic talk; and even in agricultural
there is some improvement, I think, particularly in those areas such
as almonds and wine where there are export markets that are of some
significance. The employment picture in California, I would interpret
as being relatively good. There have been steady gains in employment
in California. We have seen a very erratic picture for the growth of
the labor force and that has caused the unemployment rate to jump
around most recently from 5.8 to 7.2 percent. But that is solely the
effect of changes in the labor force and employment continues to rise.
As for other areas of strength in the Twelfth District: construction
is quite strong; residential construction and aerospace remain strong;
and commercial aircraft orders throughout the District--Washington and
California, in particular--are quite strong. One small comment on Tom
Melzer's point: We are seeing refinancings that oftentimes involve a
loan that is somewhat larger than the existing loan.
In addition to
that, there are a lot of lenders who will fold the points into the

4/1/86

loan itself.
So, I don't know how much of a cash flow bind
refinancing is in the state of California.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. It seems to me that I read something to
the effect that Alaskan oil begins closing [down] when the price gets
down to around $10 or so.
The price is getting down to around $10 or
so.
Do we still fear that?
MR. PARRY.

I think that Alaska is a disaster situation.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
government.
MR. PARRY.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
decreasing production?
MR. PARRY.

Well, a lot of that is revenue for the

At these prices is there talk of actually

I haven't heard of any.

MS. HORN. We have Standard Oil in Ohio and of course they
have a big North Slope investment; they are not talking yet about
decreasing production there. They have some major capital
expenditures--they are halfway through a four-year program that they
are considering stopping in its tracks--that they are meeting on that
these days.
They haven't made that decision yet.
But they haven't
yet talked about production cutbacks. They have certainly talked
about how the state of Alaska is going; it is just like dealing with a
foreign government, they say.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I hate to raise disconcerting thoughts
when I hear about these strengths in the second half of the year,
which I can understand. It is a popular forecast these days.
But
what would happen if OPEC really got its act together and we suddenly
found oil prices going up in the second half of the year instead of
down?
That is not a very popular view these days, but there are some
people who hold it; I don't know what the implications are.
We don't
know whether they're going to do it, much less the implications, but I
am not sure that we can assume lightly that there is no possibility of
that.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. One thing that it would clearly do,
if it did nothing else, is change the bond market psychology in one
heck of a hurry.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.
In our part of the Midwest, the situation also
seems to be improved for the three familiar reasons that Jim
enumerated. I think the fundamentals are better and I think they have
been and will be enormously helpful.
As I talk to people, I have
sensed a significant improvement in tone and attitudes over the last
couple of months.
I hate to mention the agricultural situation one
more time but I guess I feel compelled to.
I had hoped really that
the situation in 1986 was going to be better than in 1985 but I am
changing my view on that.
The rate of decline certainly has slowed
this year; but I think the year as a whole is probably is going to be
worse than 1985.
I talked to a very senior guy yesterday who told me

4/1/86

about some land that had traded at $800 to $900 an acre, which is the
And even at those low levels, with the
lowest I have heard so far.
present level of commodity prices, this land will just barely
[unintelligible] cash flow. The exchange value of the dollar is
helpful, of course, in the agricultural sector but the trade patterns
are largely in place and are very, very tough to change--certainly so
soon.
So that won't be quite as helpful as might have been expected.
The agricultural equipment business is going to be very tough this
Inventories at the dealer level are extremely high; they're
year.
So the implement people are
just not moving, and pricing is wicked.

continuing to lay off [workers] and to curtail their production, and
they are going to have a tough year. The government programs
certainly are helpful but they are also very confusing. There is a
new industry developing in the Midwest: consultants who hold meetings
and try to explain the various agricultural programs, which are very
confusing, to the farmers. Those programs are helpful, but when you
break it down on a per farm basis, particularly in Iowa which is a
corn area, the per farm assistance provided by government programs
isn't as great as one might have expected.
Just to add our comments about mortgage refinancings: One of
our directors last week characterized this year as the year of the
mortgage refinancing. He quantified the difference in monthly
payments between a 14 percent loan and a 10 percent loan on a mortgage
loan of some size. And in terms of the monthly payments it really
does amount to a significant amount of money, which certainly ought to
be helpful for consumer spending. In his view, any loan at a rate of
11-1/2 percent or over can be profitably refinanced. But there are
perhaps two negative aspects of this. First, he suggested that the
impact of this on the thrifts is going to be very very tough; that
yield on the asset side of their balance sheets is going to go down
significantly and the liability side may not be quite structured to
Secondly--and I think we are beginning to see this-deal with it.
because of the very heavy volume of refinancing going on, it is going
to be tougher to get financing for new homes. This potentially could
have a bit of an adverse effect on new home sales. But as we consider
the overall situation, I think my comments will be similar to those of
others: that the outlook continues to be positive and that the second
half of the year ought to show an improvement over the first half.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think the animal spirits
are rising in New England. Our computer industry went through a
difficult adjustment last year. We had a decline of 12 percent in
employment in the computer industry in Massachusetts last year, but
that seems to be turning around. The companies are hiring again, in
part because they're beginning to make sales in Europe again. Asked
if this is a function of the change in the dollar, the response is
"no" because they haven't changed their prices in the European

currencies; it reflects the improvement in conditions in Europe. With
respect to your conjecture about oil prices, I think that we have been
waiting for a long time for the U.S. bond market to begin to reflect
the current rate of inflation. Expectations don't change very readily
in the bond market; but once they do, I don't think they change back
very readily either. I think the bond market could accommodate the
kind of limited upward movement in oil prices that we are likely to
see. So, while I would agree with the general configuration of the

4/1/86

-10-

Board staff's forecast for a strong second half, if the forecast is
wrong, I think it is likely to be wrong because it is too
I think the errors are likely to be on the greater
conservative.
growth side rather than the lesser.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

MR. STERN. Well, Chairman, conditions in our District
I won't go through the by now familiar problems in
continue mixed.
I think those
agriculture and in our small energy patch and so forth.
are similar to the problems experienced in those sectors elsewhere in
the country. The other side of the coin, of course, is that in the
metropolitan areas the economies are generally healthy. One thing
that is going on in some of the smaller metropolitan areas that hasn't
been commented on is the effect of expansion and refurbishment of
defense installations.
In places in our District, like Rapid City and
Great Falls and Grand Forks, there is a fair amount of that kind of
work under way and it matters in places like that.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.

They are sitting next to the copper

mines.
MR. STERN. We, too, are seeing a tremendous amount of
In fact, some of the lending institutions
refinancing of mortgages.
in the Twin Cities have stopped taking applications and have said that
they may resume in the next five or six weeks; but they are just so
backed up that for the moment they have stopped. The housing market
in the Twin Cities generally is quite strong. Houses are moving very
quickly, generally at the asking price, which may imply people are
asking too little. But right now at least, things are going very well
there.
I do expect, as do many others who have commented already,
that the overall economy is going to strengthen soon because the
fundamentals seem to be positive.
I would add to those fundamentals
the fact that Ml has grown as rapidly as it has over the past year or
more now. This would suggest to me, certainly, an amply accommodative
monetary policy and ample liquidity. Liquidity, too, is boosted of
course by this refinancing of home mortgages. To some extent, like
President Horn, I have been a little surprised by the fact that the
economy seems to be continuing to plod ahead while a lot of the
financial factors--a lot of the fundamentals--have improved and have
improved rather dramatically. But I expect that this separation or
decoupling between what has been happening on the financial side and
what has been happening on the real side will probably end soon and
that we will see strengthening in the overall activity.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. BLACK.
pleasant meeting for
recent months, but I
the pack.
I thought
MR. BOEHNE.

Mr. Black.

Mr. Chairman, this is turning out to be a very
me since I frequently have been an outlier in
think I will end up somewhere in the middle of
it was real interesting that Jim Kichline-You changed my position!

MR. BLACK. Well, I was going to say I was closer to you than
anybody else, but I thought you would go into shock if I were to say
It's interesting that Jim Kichline's
that, so I refrained from it!
forecast for real GNP is what we turned in for the Humphrey-Hawkins

4/1/86

I know this will probably put Jim into a decline knowing what
report.
my forecasting record has been, so let me add that if we were doing it
today, we would probably boost that to somewhere in the neighborhood
of 4 percent.
I think one could make a case that it could be stronger
than that, but out of deference to Bob Boykin's friends in the
Southwest and the problems they have, I would temper that. But I
believe, like Frank Morris does, that the errors are probably going to
be on the high side rather than on the low side, given all the
financial underpinnings that we have for recovery: declining interest
rates, dropping oil prices, and also the apparent housing boom. So I
But as you said yourself, Mr. Chairman,
am really rather optimistic.
it's kind of based on faith because the statistics [don't show it
yet].
Every time I think they are coming out solidly on the good
side, they jump a little the other way; but I still believe that we
are in for a pretty darn good year.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I, too, am in what I'd call the
Boehne camp in the sense that I think the combination of oil prices,
interest rates, exchange rates, and stock prices have to give some
Ironically,
real boost to the economy in the second half of the year.
at least for me, I am not quite so sure about the very near-term
outlook.
I say that because I am not sure that we have fully factored
In talking to
in the adverse short-run effects of the oil situation.
some of the major oil companies that are headquartered in the New York
area, I did get the sense that the short-run cutbacks that they are
I don't know how you factor those
making are very, very substantial.
into business fixed investment numbers and so on, but something in my
gut tells me that the net effect of that in the very short run could
be larger than is built into the consensus-type forecast--and I think
the staff forecast is pretty close to a consensus forecast these days.
There are a couple of anecdotal things to report. Like
Frank, I am now getting some suggestion that the computer business may
be firming, following a pretty soft period of three or four quarters.
There is nothing hard and fast but, anecdotally, there is some
evidence along those lines.
The capital goods side is aggravated by
Interestingly
this short-run oil situation and is on the lousy side.
enough, the suburban New York area is going through a housing boom.
Housing prices are rising, at least on an anecdotal basis, very, very
rapidly in the suburban New York area.
Some of the stories I hear
strike me as unbelievable in terms of the rate of price increase on
existing homes. But all in all, I think the outlook is respectable.
Peter Sternlight and his people take these market pulse beats all of
the time, and I was a little surprised in reading some of the material
they put together in the last couple of days about more than a couple
of market types who apparently are taking a longer view of things and
expressing some concern that the underlying inflation situation,
despite all of these great numbers we are looking at, really might not
be all that good. Presumably, that reflects concern about
productivity--General Motors sneaking in 3 percent price increases and
things like that--but I was a little surprised. It would not be a
surprise for me to say that; I was surprised that other people were
saying that.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We will resume our quest for somebody who
isn't in the Boehne camp. Mr. Boykin.

4/1/86

-12-

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I don't have a whole lot to add to
the comments I made [at the dinner] yesterday evening, but I'm trying
to keep it in perspective at least.
It is true that things are not
going particularly well down our way.
On the other hand, I do think
that the press might be overplaying this a little; I'm not sure that
it is quite as dire as is being reflected in the press.
There is
overall economic growth, and it is continuing, but the gains are
becoming less and less widely spread. We do have some increase in our
non-agricultural employment, but not to the same extent as the rest of
the nation.
Of course, we picked up that 2-point jump in the
unemployment numbers, which we tried to explain a couple of weeks ago
--rationalizing at least that it probably wasn't all that great. What
I have been reading and hearing since two weeks ago--though I'm not
too sure I want to see the March number--is that that 2-point jump was
in fact on the high side.
We also have a tremendous amount of refinancing going on.
I'm hearing of delays anywhere from 6 weeks to 2 months before one can
get a refinancing done.
But we also have, particularly in a couple of
our metropolitan areas such as Houston and even up in Dallas, a lot of
homes still being auctioned off that have been foreclosed on.
We have
a lot of concern about the thrift industry down our way. There are a
lot of problems and, of course, having in the press the report that
the Home Loan Bank is bringing in 250 examiners from around the
country to help out doesn't give one a lot of confidence that there
aren't problems.
On the energy issue and the effects on inflation, I
would agree with Jim--if I understood him correctly--that the major
benefit is in this year and [what will happen] next year remains to be
seen. Jerry referred to investment and at least the short-term
effects of all of this cutback in energy, oil, and gas.
That [sector]
has been a very heavy user of investment funds.
So at least in the
short run, that's not beneficial.
I am inclined to want to believe
all of these forces that have already been identified that point to
better growth in the second half of the year.
I certainly hope that
that comes about.
I have a little reservation in terms of confidence
that it's really going to work out as well as it would appear.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I certainly agree that there are these three very
basic positive factors that should be helping the economy but, as
Jerry and Bob have said, a couple of them can cut either way-particularly the oil price decline. Maybe when we feel good, we tend
to emphasize the pluses of that rather than the minuses. Now that we
actually are seeing lower gasoline prices at the pumps, that normally
would be viewed as a plus for auto sales; yet in the auto market we
are seeing constraints coming from the consumer debt burden.
I have
actually heard some bankers in the last couple of weeks--these groups
that pass through town here on their circuit to visit people--say that
they are beginning to pay attention to the delinquencies in the
consumer credit area and that there may even be a bit of evidence that
they are going to look at credit standards. So that can be an offset,
or at least a partial offset, to the lower gasoline prices.
Also, I certainly would expect the lower long-term interest
rates to help plant and equipment spending; yet at the same time there
are these questions about what is going to happen to tax reform.
Until the [lawmakers] do something--either kill it or pass it or act

4/1/86

-13-

on it decisively--many businesses are going to postpone making
decisions on expansion or replacement of equipment because the tax
considerations are simply too important to ignore. I can't quantify
that, but I think it is a real drag and, in fact, will tend to offset
some of the good interest rate news until businessmen and women get a
better reading on that.
Despite the lower value of the dollar, import competition is
tough in a lot of countries.
I hate to admit this, being from
Detroit, but not everybody buys a foreign car just because the price
I don't happen to
tag is lower than the price tag on a domestic car.
drive an import but people tell me that there is a quality matter.
So, I don't believe we are going to see import competition necessarily
It would
knocked out immediately by the change in the exchange rate.
be nice to think that that would happen, but I don't assume it.
Also,
in the case of machine tools, I think it was my friend from Atlanta
who pointed out that there is more import competition in machinery and
In addition, there is this
machine tools, and I hear that also.
commercial real estate problem that is even spreading into the
Midwest.
It's no longer just the people down in Bob Boykin's area who
like to put up buildings and keep them unoccupied; there are some
around the Detroit suburbs and elsewhere, where buildings are popping
up like mushrooms on corners. Again, this can be a drag, I think.
Therefore, while I am fairly optimistic, I am not as optimistic as I
might be if I didn't think there were these somewhat offsetting drags
on an otherwise very placid picture.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who has a good theory as to why General
Motors picked this particular time to increase prices?
MS. SEGER.
I have been trying to check that. What I heard
is that all of his advisors told him not to do it, but that he is very
bottom-line oriented and he felt that they could get this much of an
increase done at this point. He thought it wouldn't cost them that
much in sales, so in terms of their overall profit picture they would
actually benefit slightly. They are going to reinstate the incentive
programs. My personal opinion is that he probably just didn't take
the advice that was being given.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, you could have a theory, I suppose,
that he raises the base price so he can have a bigger incentive.
MR. BOYKIN. The consumer might figure the financing looks so
good that it offsets the price increase.
MS. SEGER. Except the higher sticker stays after the
incentive financing goes.
MR. BOYKIN.
MS. SEGER.

Who pays sticker?
Well, but the--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. FORRESTAL.

Dealer cost--

The discount

[price]

is the sticker.

MS. SEGER. The discount [price] is the true sticker, right.
I think the price hike is from sticker.

4/1/86

MR. STERN. I haven't been in the showrooms lately, but I am
under the impression that prices of imported cars, in fact, have been
rising.
SEVERAL.
MR. STERN.
an opportune time.

Yes.
So perhaps a naive reading of this is that it's

MR. MELZER. One dealer for Japanese cars that we talked to
indicated that, in addition to the new model year increases, they have
had 2 to 3 to 4 percent increases already and they expect at least
one, and maybe two, more over the balance of the year.
MR. BLACK. We have one foreign car dealer who puts in a
$1,300 adjustment to market to push the asking price way above list-in addition to the dealer enhancements, which are far above any
reasonable cost.
So what appears to be the list price to every
customer is about $2,000 above the suggested manufacturer's list.
Everybody thinks he is getting a big discount.
In fact, people are
It's very hard to
paying above list right now on many foreign cars.
buy them at list.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I thought those days were gone;
[unintelligible] discouraging.
MR. BLACK. Well, one would think so, but that's in fact what
happens.
There is another dealer who gives you dealer list on one
side and all of these dealer additions. There are right many of those
and they add up to right much. So you are under the impression that
the price at the bottom of that is the sum total of all of those, but
there's about a $1,300 discrepancy there.
It's just an adjustment to
market that he is not really showing honestly.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I would like to join the
general euphoria and jump solidly into the Boehne camp.
I certainly
agree that we are very likely to see strong expansion over the second
half of the year.
The only reservation that I have is that, as Frank
pointed out, the expansion may be stronger than we now expect.
We may
get a higher rate of growth than is indicated in the staff forecast.
What is more [likely] in my view is that the expansion may be spread
out in a pattern somewhat different from that in the staff forecast.
We may not feel the full impact of all of these stimulative
developments until the first part of next year. And the period of
fairly strong growth may extend further into 1987 than we now expect.
Of course, that has some implications as to what one would be inclined
to do about it.
So I would say that if the mixed pattern of news that
we have been seeing currently continues somewhat longer than one would
expect--continues even into the second half of the year--that it is
not cause for worry.
I cannot remember any time in the recent past
when the basic fundamentals pointed so clearly to a strong expansion.
And I am prepared to sit back and wait for it and let it unfold.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

4/1/86

I generally am
Well, I will join the club too.
MR. JOHNSON.
I also agree that the fundamentals
optimistic about the situation.
look better than they have in quite some time, even though there are a
few uncertainties out there.
It wouldn't be out of the question to
I
see OPEC make another run at trying to support the [oil] price.
don't think that they can do it with all the non-OPEC production out
there, but I think that they could put some upward pressure on [oil
prices]; that's always a risk.
To discount that completely would be
I do think the fundamentals look better than they
making a mistake.
have in a long, long time.
But at the same time I think that the U.S.
economy's future is more in the hands of our foreign trading partners
We have not had to
than it ever has been in the last several years.
rely on that particularly over the last four years, as we had a lot of
domestic capacity and we didn't mind running up a trade deficit
because we had a surplus in the current account going in--or at least
Now, four years down the pike we
we had a large creditor position.
have a $150 billion trade deficit and a depreciating dollar; so I
think at this point we have to be more careful.
However,
The oil price decline is definitely very welcome.
the oil price decline benefits our major trading partners, Germany-not Germany directly, but the EC in general--and Japan, more than it
does the United States.
So, if oil prices have been good for us and
have helped our interest rates decline, they also have helped Japan
and Germany even more.
As a matter of fact, their interest rates
If you look at
should have seen an even more dramatic response.
Japanese rates on the long end of their market, they certainly have.
They have a negatively sloped yield curve right now where their long
rates are actually below their short rates, indicating to me that
there is tremendous pressure in Germany and Japan to pursue lower
interest rates just to avoid a potential deflationary cycle in those
And,
So, their fundamentals are stronger than ours.
two countries.
unlike the staff, who I think are assuming a further depreciation in
the dollar as a source of future growth in this country, I think the
way it ought to be and what I would like to see is for our trading
partners to move their interest rates lower and maintain the exchange
rate alignment that we have now and not see the dollar have to weaken
We would get our export growth from
relative to those currencies.
their growth in demand rather than from the exchange rate shift, and
that would obviously be the preferable way to see expansion here in
the United States--to see growth pick up in Japan and Germany.
Since
the elasticities are stronger from the demand effects on exports than
the exchange rate effects, and we don't have the negative potential on
the inflation side, that's really where we want the growth.
I wish I
were really optimistic that we would see the kind of flexibility in
Germany and Japan that we really need to get that done, but they seem
to be fairly satisfied to run generally restrictive policies.
There
is tremendous pressure, given the fact that Japan faces a negatively
sloped yield curve and Germany is not much different than that, for
interest rates to go lower there and the exchange rate not have to
come under the kind of pressure that we might expect.
I think that's
I
what we have to have to get the really good outlook in the future.
am generally optimistic about it but it could come grudgingly; so I am
not sure that I would put in the second-half growth effects as
strongly as the staff has them because I think that may come a little
slower.

4/1/86

-16-

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I would like to say a word about this
foreign situation, particularly with respect to Japan. There is talk
in Japan about some kind of stimulative action within a week or so-not on monetary policy particularly, but presumably some kind of
budget action--and I don't know what it means. Whether the action is
[going to be] significant or trivial, cosmetic or real, I'm not quite
sure. But there's going to be something there.
I do think--not
necessarily as part of that package--that they are debating at the
very least, and probably debating in a positive way, whether some
further reduction in their discount rate is appropriate in a period of
weeks, presumably before the Summit, which is some time in early May.
I continue to have some concern about the rate of Japanese growth,
although I guess our staff forecast has it a little faster now.
Governor Angell.
MR. ANGELL.
It seems to me that the uncertainties certainly
outweigh the facts we know in regard to the future.
It's important
that we look at the day-to-day numbers; we may not want to believe
them, but we ought to look at them and keep track of them. The
monetary aggregates certainly have rebounded in March.
If those
aggregates continue to move at the March pace, I think that might tell
us something different than if growth falls back to the JanuaryFebruary level.
I think it's very significant that in the global
economy and the domestic economy as well we have dramatic price
changes.
We end up with winners and losers.
Before one concludes too
quickly regarding the impact of these kinds of changes, we have to
recognize that sometimes the marginal propensity to consume for the
winners isn't always the same as it is for the losers.
And it seems
to me that we do have a severe danger of encountering a world trade
contraction in this kind of environment. If that occurs, that's going
to impact the export markets and undoubtedly put more pressure on the
deflation of international commodity prices. Commodity prices are
moving sideways to slightly downward with oil excluded.
If those
commodity prices pick up speed on the down side, I think that is a
very risky pattern. It's a risky pattern not just for agriculture and
oil interests in the United States; a lot of the third world countries
are commodity sellers. And if we continue to thrust the third world
into a position of not receiving any kind of a return on what they
have to sell, they're not going to be buying as much as we might
expect them to buy. But it seems to me that if we don't stumble,
eventually these real balance effects will take place.
I'm somewhat
concerned that oil prices at some point in time might not do what we
want them to do.
I suppose all of us would prefer that they move up a
bit and stabilize.
But we don't have any guarantee of that.
It seems to me that we might need some rather dramatic moves
if oil prices were to rebound sharply.
So, I think we have to watch
things very carefully.
I would indicate that I'm much more
optimistic--I like to be optimistic about something--than the group
now [and] as much as six months ago with regard to the inflation
front.
It seems to me that it's imperative that we get our inflation
rates down in the 2 percent or 1 percent range during this oil price
move.
If we end up with our staff forecast of inflation, I think
that's very bad news for the dollar and our future.
So, I'm somewhat
optimistic that if there's any indication that prices are going to
move in another direction, we could be in for one heck of a deal.

-17-

4/1/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm a little surprised on this price
forecast that last quarter and this quarter the GNP deflator stays up
as high as does in your forecast with the wholesale index going down
and the consumer price index going down. You have it going up very
narrowly. Would you explain that to me quite simply?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, it's the arithmetic of the first shot of
As you remember in the old days, if you had a
oil [price declines].
commodity with a very high price deflator such as oil and it's an
import, it's a negative and depresses the deflator. Now that we have
rebased on 1982 and oil prices are falling, we have a low deflator and
they're subtracted out.
So in the first round effect you will get a
higher deflator from the arithmetic.
this?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is the implicit deflator you have in
Does that happen in the fixed-weight deflator?

In the GNP fixed-weight deflator
MR. KICHLINE. Well, yes.
what you're fixing is quantity, and the price is declining so you are
still subtracting both. You're still subtracting imports in the first
Later on you get benefits as those prices show up, for
round effects.
example, in gasoline and you get an effect in the personal consumption
expenditures. So, over time, you get something positive.
MR. PARRY.

What if you looked at domestic output?

MR. KICHLINE.
MR. TRUMAN.

You get a lower deflator.
Much lower, if you had that.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Much lower, I guess.

All right.

MR. KICHLINE. We have numbers of 2-1/2 percent instead of
3-3/4 percent for the first quarter and 1-1/2 percent in the second
quarter as opposed to 2-1/2 to 3 percent.
It's a big effect.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. WALLICH.

We can turn to Mr. Axilrod and--

Could I?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Sure.

MR. WALLICH. It seems to me that we hear a number of
elements that are to some degree inconsistent.
If we don't get a
strong move, which would be to my mind deleterious, we will get a
small to moderate move that perhaps will not look very strong, but at
least will give us adequate growth of GNP. But the problems in
Germany and Japan trouble me a great deal more than what is likely to
be happening to us.
We're seeing countries that are burdened with
difficulties, with balance of payments that they don't want to
tolerate. We seem to be willing to have $100 billion in one and
another $100 billion in the other and say that it makes no difference
if other countries are willing to live that way--our way. But I do
not believe that they will be.
And so I share the feelings that we
will some day get into these problems.
Those--perhaps not in terms of
the numbers but in terms of where the pressures are going to be-strike me as more difficult than our own problems.

4/1/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. As I listen to this, I come away with the
view that while the second half of the year may be happy, and
everybody has good reason [to believe that] provided the oil situation
doesn't snap back at us, I wonder whether the uncertainties presently
are being emphasized quite enough. To get this growth in the first
quarter and I suppose in the second quarter, we have to have inventory
and trade improvement, right?
In your projection?
MR. KICHLINE.

The second quarter or--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
quarter, right?

Well, it's certainly true in the first

MR. KICHLINE. Yes.
In the first quarter we had final sales
flat and 3 percent growth; half of that was imports and the other half
was a switch out of CCC, a reduced runoff of farm inventories.
So
there isn't much there.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The inventory change is all in CCC?

MR. KICHLINE. Final sales are 0.1 in our estimates.
Half is
reduced imports and the other half is inventories; and about threefourths of those inventories are a smaller runoff of farm commodities.
In fact, CCC purchases are declining. In the second quarter we have
final sales and GNP pretty much even; so we don't have much in the way
That's a quarter where
of inventories at all in the second quarter.
we anticipate auto inventories will be running off and we will get
some accumulation elsewhere. But essentially, if you look-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
in the second quarter?
MR. KICHLINE.

It declines.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. KICHLINE.

Yes, declines means improving.

Well, there's no contribution to GNP growth.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

And you have the trade balance improving

Oh, it isn't?

No contribution?

I suppose that happens in the second half?

MR. KICHLINE. Well, you said the deficit?
Excuse me, in the
second quarter we have an estimate of net exports of minus $130
billion and minus $115 billion for the year. So it's the second half
where we have appreciable improvement in prospect.
MR. ANGELL. Have you taken into consideration any change in
desired inventory levels due to a period of falling oil and energy
prices?
MR. KICHLINE. Well, I think we have. We actually have, in
an historical sense, fairly low ratios of inventories to business
sales. What has entered into our thinking, essentially, is that there
is absolutely no shortage in most areas--prices are falling.
Interest
rates have been rather high and are still high; there are all sorts of
incentives to economize on inventories.
So I think in an historical
sense we really have a very mild accumulation over the forecast

-19

4/1/86

In the short run it
period. There are two areas that are problems.
has been oil and coal, that whole complex of energy [products], and
the desire to reduce inventories; the other area that we know about is
autos. And there's a major problem there.
MR. JOHNSON. Let me ask one thing. What would the forecast
look like in the second half if you didn't assume a further
depreciation in the dollar--if you had the same exchange rate and,
let's say, you already had a fairly reasonable expansion abroad?
Would you say about 4 percent combined EC and Japan?
No, closer to 3 percent.

MR. TRUMAN.

Closer to 3 percent.

MR. JOHNSON.

One reason why
MR. TRUMAN. And that's one of the problems.
the trade balance as a whole doesn't improve faster is because we have
growth pretty much as fast here, especially in the second half, as we
have abroad.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, but--

MR. TRUMAN. As far as the dollar is concerned, in our
forecast for 1986 we're assuming it doesn't have an impact in 1986 on
what you're looking at now.
MR. JOHNSON.

Okay.
The way we think about these things--

MR. TRUMAN.
MR. JOHNSON.

It's purely demand.

MR. TRUMAN. What we're seeing in the second half of this
year is what we normally have in terms of the dollar, because there's
no further decline I think this time--at least the magnitude is very
It's in 1987, as Jim mentioned, that
small; you will see some maybe.
the effects of the [further depreciation]-MR. PARRY. Would you have inflation the same in 1987 as in
1986 if the dollar didn't depreciate from this point?
I think there are inflation consequences from
MR. KICHLINE.
this additional 15 percent, but they would be in 1987.
MR. PARRY.

That's what I mean.

MR. KICHLINE.

That's right.

MR. PARRY. Almost all of that increase in inflation is due
to what happened to the dollar?
MR. KICHLINE.

Well, in the sense that it's already--

MR. TRUMAN. Also, the oil prices stop going down, so you
have that kind of effect.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I was simply going to suggest that
there still are great concrete questions about capital spending,

-20-

4/1/86

commercial construction, consumer debt load, the governmental budget,
foreign growth, the impact of the oil price and other things.
I think
there are good reasons why the economy isn't looking all that robust
right at the moment.
MR. WALLICH. Would you regard it as being much more robust
if we had this additional extension in the way the economy is growing
and then a year from now it was presumably going downhill?
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I don't know as I see it presumably going
downhill a year from now if all these nice things that everybody has
been emphasizing happen.
If we can get through a little--not exactly
a valley, but a mesa or something-MR. RICE. Only that office construction that you point to is
relatively permanent. The others are going to-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
hopefully, not the budget.
MR. RICE.

Maybe that, and not the budget presumably;

Yes, we hope the budget deficit is going to fall.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I hope so, but that reduces the
[unintelligible] presumably-MR. RICE.

[Unintelligible].

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we will see.
Axilrod and then we'll have some coffee.
MR. AXILROD.

Let's turn to Mr.

[Statement--see Appendix.]

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
[Unintelligible] that you can sit there
and talk about interest rates for 10 minutes and not talk about
I'm not sure whether I'm less confused by the
monetary aggregates.
interest rates than I am by the monetary aggregates.
MR. AXILROD.

I mentioned the monetary aggregates in passing.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
I [unintelligible] that it was in passing.
Are there any questions or comments that you want to direct to Mr.
Axilrod before the coffee break?
MR. JOHNSON.
I just have one, Steve. The last thing you
said was that you would expect alternative B to restore some upward
tilt to the yield curve. That seems pretty uncertain.
MR. AXILROD.
It is uncertain. Also, it has risk potential
but I think it is very possible.
If the oil price continues to
plummet down to $8 or $7--it's below $10 now already this morning-then of course long rates may continue down. But to some degree, they
probably have by this time some lower short rates in the future in
them than we now have in the market I suppose.
MR. JOHNSON.
It just seems to me that alternative B--not
that I have any problem with it one way or the other--would flatten
out the yield curve rather than have any upward tilt.
It probably
would put a bit of pressure on the short end of the market.
In the

4/1/86

-21-

context of current oil prices, I think maybe it would lead to further
declines in the long-term yields and a rise in the shorter end.
MR. PARRY. Isn't that the assumption of the forecast?
thought a flat yield curve was the assumption of the forecast.

I

MR. AXILROD. Well, I think the long rates built into this
forecast are actually somewhat higher than we now have in the market.
MR. PARRY.

I mean the shape of the curve.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
weeks ago.
MR. AXILROD.

Yes, but the forecast was made up two

That's right.

MR. MELZER. Steve, where do you view the long-run
equilibrium real rates to be in the long term?
MR. AXILROD. My view is very simplistic because when you get
sophisticated the reality tends to get a little lost in this, I think.
It is something like the long-term real growth potential of the
economy, about which there's great doubt now. In my own mind I'd put
it somewhere between 2-1/2 and 3 percent, give or take a margin of
error around that.
So the Treasury yield at 7-1/4 percent is very
low, if you think the rate of inflation expectations, as in the Hoey
survey, is 5 or 5-1/2 percent.
[Unintelligible] between Treasuries
and corporate bonds opened up here. If you think the rate of
inflation expectations isn't properly represented by the Hoey survey-and I don't think it is--[unintelligible], then if you put the
inflation expectations down lower than that 5 percent, of course, your
real rates relative to corporates still look somewhat on the high side
relative to the expected rate of return.
It seems to me it's a very
"right on the edge" kind of judgment.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
monetarism sound good!

When you hear all this, it makes

MR. AXILROD. Well, that's why I did mention the aggregates
in passing.
It's a very important element.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
let's break for coffee.

Any other questions or comments?

If not,

[Coffee break]
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Who would like to express some more
detailed policy preferences?
You are looking eager, Mr. Melzer.
MR. MELZER. Oh, I have been here writing away.
I have been
trying to figure out how to get in the word that was mentioned last
night--what was it, desiderata?--but I haven't been able to do it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Desiderata: We want no inflation and good
growth and external equilibrium. Those are the desiderata now.
MR. MELZER. Shall I go ahead?
I would be in favor of
alternative B, maintaining the existing degree of reserve restraint.

4/1/86

That's based on [my view] that the intermediate-term economic outlook
is generally favorable, as was discussed today, that we already have
an accommodative monetary policy that I think recognizes some of the
uncertainties that exist in the short run, and I guess a skepticism on
my part still about Gramm-Rudman and what that's going to produce. We
didn't talk about that at length today. As I look further down the
road, I am concerned a little as we go through the process of
adjusting to lower trade deficits and a shift from foreign investment
flows or foreign savings to more reliance on domestic savings about
the effects associated with that. As we get to that point in time,
and it's probably a good 6 to 12 months out before the process really
begins, the inflation that naturally would be associated with that
process would trouble me; and presumably at that time the effects of
lower oil prices pretty much will have washed through the system. It
would trouble me at that time if that adjustment process were taking
place against the backdrop of a monetary policy that was perceived to
be too accommodative, because I think that would simply exacerbate the
problem and the interest rate effects of that and so forth. That's
looking a little further down the road, but to some extent we have to
take that into account in terms of where we are positioned now.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think that's true.

Mr. Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, a lot of the commentary one sees in
the press and elsewhere suggests that this reduced inflationary rate
gives us an opportunity to stimulate real economic activity without
I think we might well get away with that in the
reigniting inflation.
short run, but I would be quite concerned about an approach such as
that in the long run.
The effects of the oil price decline are not
going to last forever; once they are behind us we are going to be
exposed to the risk that we will have a renewed outbreak in inflation,
particularly if the economy is growing strongly and the dollar is
still dropping.
I think we need to keep that in mind in establishing
our policy; indeed, I would like to propose something I think Governor
Angell came very close to saying a while ago--that rather than look at
the current situation as a chance to stimulate the economy, we look at
it as a chance to consolidate these excellent gains that we've made on
inflation in recent years in the hope that somehow or another that
will give us lasting price stability and a chance for sustainable
growth in employment and production over the long run.
With those thoughts in mind, I would come out the same as Tom
Melzer did: "B" with a $300 million borrowed reserve objective, with
the federal funds rate expected to be in the neighborhood of 7-1/4 to
7-3/8 percent.
I would be quite happy, as you might suspect, if we
got the kind of M1 growth embodied in "C," but I think we probably
ought to leave money market conditions where they are for the time
being. I think it is important, though, as we move ahead--from the
standpoint of our longer-run credibility--that we try to hold M1
closer to its long-run target than we succeeded in doing last year,
unless there is a definite weakening in the economy or a continued
For that reason and since Ml is right
decline in the velocity of M1.
close to the top of its range--in fact, a little above it--I would be
inclined to indicate a greater willingness toward restraint than
toward easing in this intermeeting period. Just one comment: I am
suggesting the $300 million borrowed reserve target on the assumption
that the discount rate is unchanged.
If the Board should decide to
cut that, under our present operating procedures we would expect the

4/1/86

federal funds rate to move down by roughly a commensurate amount.
That to me would be an easing of money market conditions, or "reserve
So, if we should do that, I
restraint" I guess is the term we use.
think we would want to take another look at that borrowing target.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Mr. Chairman, you outlined some uncertainties
and risks in the outlook. Uncertainties are always with us and I
suppose one has to take those into account. But in spite of those
uncertainties, I think there are some very significant factors at work
in the economy that are going to accelerate economic activity in the
For that reason I think we ought to take
second half of the year.
this drop in oil prices as a fortuitous event that will continue to
lower inflation and we ought to seize this opportunity to translate
that into some kind of permanent improvement in the underlying rate of
So like Mr. Black, I would like us to take this
price increases.
opportunity and not dissipate it in any way by an easing of policy.
And I think that an easing of policy would do just that; it would give
the markets the wrong impression about how we feel about inflation.
So, I would not want to see any easing of policy at this time. I
certainly don't see any reason to tighten either, particularly in view
of the international situation and the value of the dollar. So, I
would prefer to keep policy pretty much where we are, on an even keel
without a tilt in either direction. I am a little unhappy about what
M1 is doing at the moment, but I guess M2's performance makes Ml's
If market rates were, of their own
performance a bit more palatable.
accord, to back up a little--if the markets found that they had
perhaps overreacted to this ebullience that is going on--I wouldn't
Again, where I would come
want to resist that upward drift in rates.
out, Mr. Chairman, is to try to consolidate our position with respect
to inflation, keep inflationary expectations damped, and keep policy
That means alternative B, in my mind, with
about where it is.
borrowing of about $300 million.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. You mentioned, understandably, a concern
about getting this break in oil prices converted maybe into some
permanent progress or some further progress against inflation. That's
The problem there seems to me to
a goal I suppose we would all share.
be: How does one ratchet down somehow the cost pressures in the
services side of the economy?
The manufacturing side is doing pretty
well except for this--Martha Seger is our representative of Detroit-General Motors [price increase], which I don't like because-MS. SEGER.

I agree with you.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
--it's part of a pattern of price and wage
increases reverting to normal. But in general, in manufacturing, in
construction, and in some other areas--certainly, commodity prices are
depressed--it all looks pretty good. How do we convert this better
short-term price performance into some kind of ratcheting down for all
that long series of service prices where the economy is doing pretty
well and the wage and salary [increases] seem to be stuck at about 5
percent or maybe a little more?
I don't know.
MR. JOHNSON. Even if those don't go lower, if you
consolidate the oil price decline and don't let other relative prices

4/1/86

-24-

go higher than they currently are, you have a ratcheting down of the
general price level.
In other words,-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. A ratcheting down of the levels, but I
don't know that you have a ratcheting down of the trend.
MR. JOHNSON. You would slow the inflation rate.
It's just
that if we try and hold monetary policy constant and let the oil
prices decline, one would expect other relative prices to rise and the
general price level to remain unchanged. But if we stop that, if we
don't let other relative prices show gains to offset the oil price
declines, then I think we have ratcheted down prices.
MR. MORRIS.
I don't think we can do much to reduce the rate
of inflation in the services sector until the next recession. It
seems to me that if we are successful in preventing the inflation rate
in the services sector from rising while the economy is still in an
expansion phase, we have done pretty well.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it has done something; I don't
disagree with that.
But ideally, if we had a better inflation
performance for a year, let's say, and that gets built into salary and
other behavior in the services area to a degree, that's what you would
like to see happen.
If the consumer price index is running 2 percent
or so, a 5 percent wage increase looks pretty big given the
productivity increase.
I am not sure if it looks big to the people
giving it or receiving it.
MR. ANGELL. Over a period of time, the inflation rate in the
services sector is going to be much slower to adjust to monetary
scarcity than it is in the commodity sector because we have too many
established techniques for maintaining these rates of inflation, not
the least of which is government. There continue to be areas in
which, unless you put pain on government, you don't stop the wage
increases in government.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have stopped the wage increases in
government--at least the federal government--for better or for worse.
MR. ANGELL. The next step is that, over a period of time,
the private services sector is going to adjust those rates of
inflation to the others, as soon as they believe them. But how are
they going to believe them when our own staff and our own FOMC don't
believe the rate of inflation is down?
I don't understand how we can
lead the way to lower inflation when we keep saying it's going to be
higher.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

So far it has worked.

Mr. Parry.

MR. PARRY. I would favor alternative B for many of the
reasons that were mentioned.
I think the possibility of a pickup in
the second half of the year is a sufficient condition to recommend
alternative B.
I would make the point that the assumption under
alternative B of the relationship between the economy and the
aggregates basically states that we are going to see a continuation of
a sharp decline in velocity. And I would just raise the possibility
that given this economy, with these interest rates, we could even see
the aggregates grow more slowly--which should not be interpreted as a

4/1/86

-25-

tightening move. The second point I would make is really a question,
since I am rather new at this.
Under the operational paragraph, we
said last time "maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions."
If we were to adopt alternative B, we would say the same
thing; but shouldn't there be a parenthetic phrase inserted to say the
existing degree of pressure on reserve positions that has persisted
Because, in effect, if we had cut
since the cut in the discount rate?
the discount rate and didn't change the borrowing assumption, we
actually would have eased reserve positions. And the historical
record-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have run into that problem
before. Let's worry about the wording of the directive on the next
round.
I think you have a legitimate question. But meanwhile, when
you say "B," you are thinking in terms of something like $300 million?
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Stern.

I, too, would favor alternative B. As has been
MR. STERN.
mentioned, there are certainly short-term risks, in terms of real
economic performance. There are also risks it seems to me, perhaps
looking longer term, on the price side; some of those have been
alluded to. But productivity performance for the overall economy has
been disappointing, perhaps to put it mildly, [unintelligible] the
decline in the dollar. I am not at all sanguine about progress on
inflation in the services sector, in part because I think we are
facing strong and growing demand both for the services produced and
for the labor to produce them. And that just doesn't strike me as an
environment where we are likely to make a lot of progress in bringing
down inflation in that sector.
Indeed, I think if we factor those
things together--the particular situation in services, the
productivity side, the dollar, and so forth--looking longer term we
clearly face some risks on the price side.
For the time being
alternative B, which I would take to be a "don't rock the boat"
alternative, is satisfactory.
I would be concerned, however, if it
turned out under alternative B that the monetary aggregates grew more
rapidly than is currently envisioned because, under all the
circumstances, I think that might be something we would want to
resist.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Keehn.

MR. KEEHN.
I would be in favor of "B," but I might also tend
a little toward "A" despite the positive tone of the comments
regarding the economy earlier. Nevertheless, the current situation is
a little on the weak side and though we all expect the longer run to
be better, it's a little uncertain.
It does seem to me that the

longer-run outlook will be validated if we are able to maintain these
levels of interest rates.

I am just a little bothered by some of the

comments with regard to rates that are incorporated in the text around
alternative B. So, I would choose "B," but on the borrowing I would
tend to want between $200 and $300 million as the alternative.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Johnson.

4/1/86

MR. JOHNSON.
I tend to agree with that statement. My
feeling is that I don't see any reason to change sharply from the
current reserve maintenance situation. But I would like to have some
flexibility at least built in on alternative B with a slightly lower
borrowing target, given the way the yield curve looks now and the
point made by Steve Axilrod and Peter Sternlight that there has been a
discounting already in the market with the spread between the T-bill
and the funds rate. And if the Japanese were to cut their rates later
for some reason, there might be an opportunity to let the funds rate
ease some without any exchange rate implications and without any
particular pressures resulting from that.
The other problem I have is
that I am a little uncertain about this velocity issue. Of course, my
concerns are more on the down side. When we met before, we talked a
little about a zero rate of velocity growth as the most likely
possibility during the year. However, the way things are shaping up
during the first half of this year, it certainly looks to me like
nominal GNP is going to come in below our earlier expectations.
If we
maintain the same amount of M1 growth or reserves, I would expect the
weakness in velocity to show up more severely than we anticipated.
The first-quarter [velocity] looks like it's going to be minus about 2
percent an annual rate; in the second quarter it could even be more
than that.
I think we are going to see more softness in the second
quarter than we have in the first.
MR. PARRY.
In alternative B, in terms of growth of the
aggregates, Ml is 7-1/2 percent.
MR. JOHNSON. Yes, the velocity was in there; I agree.
I am
just saying that we are getting a lower nominal [GNP], implying a more
negative velocity than we had before.
So I guess the issue is: If
that lower nominal is all on the inflation side, that's fine; we ought
to consolidate our gains to some extent. But I think we ought to be a
little careful if we are still seeing the same trend in velocity that
we've seen before, since we have had further interest rate declines
and inflationary expectation breaks.
I don't know what the right
amount of reserves is to offset that.
I see this as purely technical.
I am not talking about an easier policy; I am only talking about a
purely technical adjustment.
I think we ought to be cautious and we
ought to have some flexibility built into alternative B in case we see
that develop.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Mr. Chairman, I think this is one of those times
when we ought to gear current policy to where we expect the economy to
be six to nine months from now. Quite clearly, our expectations in
general are as strong as, and in some cases stronger, than the Board
staff's projections.
So, I think we should stay with our present
policy, alternative B.
I think the market has overshot the current
discount rate, and alternative B probably will require some modest
upward adjustments in market rates.
But I don't think we should let
that trouble us.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Corrigan.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. In the context of a consensus view
of the economy that we talked about earlier, ironically, I find this a
tough setting for monetary policy. I myself am in the somewhat

4/1/86

uncharacteristic position of thinking that in the very short term--the
next couple of months--the economy could be on the weaker side simply
because I have a bigger allowance for short-run negative oil [effects]
than others do.
Then again, the point has been made that there are
other things in the short run that can be troubling: debt burdens,
overbuilding, financial problems, slow growth in the other OECD
countries.
But when I think about that agenda of things, it is not at
all clear to me that any of them is going to be helped very much by
easier monetary policy; I could almost agree in a couple of cases that
they might be affected adversely by an easier monetary policy-especially if one thinks that the second half of the year is going to
be distinctly stronger. That is the rock and the hard place: an
economy that could be weaker in the short run and stronger in the
I think the only thing to do in that
second part of the year.
situation is nothing; so I'd be squarely in camp "B."
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I would vote for alternative B and if there is a
shading needed, I would shade a touch toward alternative A. The
positive factors we have talked about extensively; I am still
impressed, though, that there are some drags on the economy that we
I would like to suggest that in a technical way
have to be aware of.
I am not talking
we look for opportunities to cut the discount rate.
about fiddling with the reserves, but if foreign countries such as
Japan alter their discount rates again and if our long-term rates
decline a little more, I think we will have a yield structure in this
country that is unsustainable. And the rate that will prove to be out
of line is the discount rate. To the extent that we could cut that a
bit, following market movements, I think that would help without
gunning the economy. So, I would go for something like "B" with a
range around the $300 million borrowing target, or $200 to $300
million.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mrs. Horn.

MS. HORN. I favor a "wait and see" posture and I think "B"
I think that we really do have the time to watch
is that posture.
events unfold. As for the borrowing number, I suppose I am for $300
million, although we always seem to interpret that in the light of
what happens.
It has recently been running below $250 million and I'm
for $300 million but would go at it carefully, which I guess is the
way we do it anyway.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
Carefully meaning--?
MS. HORN.

I didn't hear that last sentence.

Going up from $250 million to $300 million.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE. Well, I am more or less in the "B" camp.
I can,
however, see the wisdom of at least allowing for a little flexibility
toward the "B+" side.
I am not sure that flexibility would be wise to
use, but I could see a back-up in rates sufficient that that little
flexibility might have to be used.
Where I come out is "B" to start
out with, but keep this little tilt on the shelf.
If it needs to be

-28-

4/1/86

used, it needs to be used; and if it doesn't, let's just slide through
the period with a pretty solid alternative B.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Mr. Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. Mr. Chairman, I would lean toward "B" with a
little to the "B+" side.
I recognize that fine tuning and so forth is
not overly successful, but it does seem to me that at least for the
first quarter and the second quarter the economy doesn't look that
strong. I recognize there are lags, but we do meet again in May; and
I would just lean a bit on the high side of "B" until we have more
information, which we will tomorrow and the next day, [or] until we
meet here in May.
If that subtle move were a mistake, I think it
could be undone, probably subtly. I would be slightly in favor of
"B+. "

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Rice.

MR. RICE. Well, Mr. Chairman, I wish I could be different
from everybody else, but I can't.
So I am going to go along with
alternative B for all the reasons that people have expressed. We want
to stay where we are, to do nothing, to maintain an even keel--steady
as you go.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. There just isn't any basis for an easing policy
right now. Alternative B clearly is in the right ballpark.
I am a
little concerned about the 7-1/2 percent [Ml] number.
It seems to me
that velocity may be on a different path than we anticipated.
In
previous periods of history it has been on a downward path for many,
many years and changed inflation expectations may very well mean that
we've got negative velocity. I'd anticipate negative velocity of more
like 4 percent for the second quarter. And if we have 4 percent, I
don't know that 4 percent nominal is too high, so I would be much more
comfortable with an 8 percent than a 7-1/2 percent on "B."
I am not
concerned about the reserve positions as long as the Desk is astute,
as they have been during the time that I have watched them, in regard
to managing that account.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Looking at these velocity numbers, what do
you compute for the velocity--I think you do quarterly averages-implied by alternative B, for what it's worth?
It is just arithmetic.
MR. AXILROD.

It is around 4 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Just looking at it, it looks like what-about a 3-1/2 percent velocity decline?
MR. AXILROD. That's right, compounded.
average is higher than the month-to-month.

The quarterly

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. That requires believing both the M1
forecast and the economic forecast, which are two very large
assumptions. Mr. Guffey.
MR. GUFFEY. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
I would also join
those--virtually everyone that I have heard around the table--who

-29-

4/1/86

I am a bit concerned, however, about the
would opt for alternative B.
discussion of the borrowing level being a bit below the $300 million
level. It seems to me that we are very close to the frictional level
now. And to talk about $200 to $300 million and $250 million, for
example--.
I just feel more comfortable staying where we are; if that
is $300 million, I'd opt for "B" with $300 million and not fool around
with the borrowing level.
MR. ANGELL.
Would you want that even if that meant that fed
funds rates tick back up?
MR. GUFFEY. The answer, I think, depends on what happens
I guess for the fed funds rate in and of itself the answer
elsewhere.
is yes.
I think that the market has probably overshot a bit.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Are we in a period where seasonal
borrowing will start to pick up now?
I think it has begun to pick up just
MR. STERNLIGHT.
slightly; and I would look for it to pick up somewhat more as we get
into--

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
less than $300 million.
MR. STERNLIGHT.
constraining.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

In that sense even $300 million is

$300 million, I think, becomes slightly less

What is seasonal borrowing now?
About $70 million, I think, is the last--

MR. AXILROD. Around $70-$85 million on average roughly. We
would expect it to pick up maybe into the low hundreds or something
Without much pressure on the
like that over the next month or so.
funds rate, we would not expect much of a pickup.
MR. ANGELL. Most of that seasonal borrowing may not recur
this year simply because there is liquidity there and the seasonal
At least that has been our
borrowing privilege has not been used.
experience.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
borrowing?
MR. AXILROD.
MR. GUFFEY.
MR. KOHN.

What was the peak last year for seasonal

My memory is a couple of hundred million or so.
About $180 million.

August's $221 million was the monthly-average

peak.
MR. GUFFEY.
this year.

Under the circumstances I think it would be less

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. WALLICH.

Want to add something, Governor Wallich?

$300 million and alternative B.

4/1/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. RICE.

You didn't break the pattern.

The first time I have ever seen that!

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, we have shadings of differences. We
have some full-blooded "Bs" and we have some weak-kneed, but the view
is generally around "B."
We might as well see what shadings we have
here and [address] Mr. Parry's point. The last two reserve periods,
which means for four weeks, borrowing has been averaging just a little
below $250 million. We played it a little on the cautious side and it
has come out pretty close to where we intended because we didn't have
any computer problems and so forth during that particular period. We
came in a little under $300 million.
One interpretation is we could
continue doing that: seek something like $300 million, but played
somewhat cautiously in the absence of other developments.
I guess we
could call that maintaining.
I don't know whether it needs
[explanation]; the difference is so small. We have sometimes done
exactly what Mr. Parry suggested, if I interpreted him right.
When
reserve pressures have changed during the period, we put some language
in saying "the degree of reserve pressure that emerged during the
previous period" or something like that.
I guess it is a matter of
taste as to whether that's where the center of gravity lies or whether
it's worth putting that in there if the difference is so small.
MR. RICE.
I wouldn't say reserve pressures eased after the
discount rate; interest rates fell.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Actually, it came before the discount rate
lowering, as I remember it, or it began-MR. AXILROD.

That's right.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. This is no big deal, because it was so
high the previous two-week period because there were computer problems
one weekend. We actually had $600 million one week, but I do not-MR. AXILROD.
It was $630 million the week of the 19th and
[unintelligible] the week of-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The $630 million was a freak; I don't know
where it would have come out without the computer problems. One or
two people said they would be reluctant to see the borrowing go below
$300 million and others suggested that at least there ought to be some
flexibility to go below $300 million. These are pretty fine shadings.
Let me jump down [in the directive].
I don't know if this language in
the directive is great, anyway. Do we want to make it perfectly
symmetrical in language in the third sentence? Or would we better
capture [the consensus] by changing that sentence to say either
"somewhat" or "slightly lesser reserve restraint would be acceptable
and somewhat greater reserve restraint might be"?
We've used that
I think there is a question--we've
device from time to time.
discussed this before at times, though it wasn't appropriate when we
changed the discount rate this time.
If for some reason, because of
international considerations or otherwise, it seemed appropriate to
reduce the discount rate at some point, I take it that the sense right
now--other things being equal--is that we might increase the borrowing
level a bit rather than the opposite.

4/1/86

SEVERAL.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
directive.

I don't think we can write that into the

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. BERNARD.

When do we meet again?

May 20th--7 weeks.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, my instincts tell me that
sentence probably should be symmetrical even though 7 weeks is a long
time.
I don't think we can rule out the possibility, even though I
don't see it, that the economy could pick up even faster than most
people are assuming.
I don't think we can rule that out either
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
but it's a question of whether we bias it slightly.
It seems to me the most likely event that might
MR. ANGELL.
necessitate tightening would be an oil price move; that probably would
be more likely in this quarter than robust growth.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

An oil price move upward?

MR. ANGELL. Well, yes. And it seems to me that if we had an
oil price move upward and it appeared to some that a cartel move might
be effective for a while, with the money the public seems to want to
hold in transaction balances we might have some wider shift in
expectations that might require some tightening. It seems to me we
should be prepared for such a policy if that were to occur.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, who knows what's going to happen?
But I would be a little surprised if that happened in the next 6 weeks
or so.
I wouldn't be at all surprised to see it happen in a slightly
longer time perspective. But suppose it happened in the next month or
I don't
Would the right reaction be initially to tighten a bit?
two.
know.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

MR. JOHNSON.
It all depends on the overall long-term
If one were to view this as
inflationary expectation effects of that.
a permanent change back in the direction that causes expectations to
have to adjust, those balances people are holding in M1 might turn
more into transactions balances relative to savings. And we would
want to take it out. But who knows what the behavioral effects would
be--whether they'd consider it long-term or short-term?
If it really
is an inflationary expectation adjustment, we'd have to tighten.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Certainly, over time it would go in the
What it would do
direction of more inflation. You can't escape that.
to the business picture in the shorter run, I'm not so sure.
MR. BOEHNE.
I don't think you can anticipate those kinds of
If there is a definite change in the price of oil up or down
things.
we might want to have some consultation over the next seven weeks.
We would have to take
It's just a little hard to judge what we'd do.
a look at the context in which it happened.

-32-

4/1/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't disagree with that, and I
don't think it's going to happen over this time period. But who
knows?
Well, let me put it this way: the straightforward thing to do
is just to say "maintain" and keep all the wording the same, putting
in whatever these percentages are.
You can all [react] to that. Who
wants to shoot at that?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
like to do it.
MR. JOHNSON.

I don't want to shoot at it;

I'd

Where are you, line 68?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I'm looking at a different sheet where I
don't have the line numbers.
MR. BOEHNE. One way to accommodate this idea of a little
flexibility would be to reverse the order and say somewhat lesser
reserve restraint first followed by somewhat greater reserve
restraint.
That's very, very subtle but I think we're talking about
very, very subtle differences.
MR. GUFFEY.

The word is cryptic.

MR. JOHNSON. I don't think the probabilities are symmetric
in this thing.
I would still be in the "B+" category. I realize that
I'm probably in the minority on this, but I wouldn't want a purely
symmetric statement that something like a borrowing target of $200 to
$300 million suits me.
CHAIRMAN
Boehne suggested,
does anything but
is whether people
slightly.

VOLCKER. Well, it's hard to object to what Mr.
and it's hard to object because I don't think it
make a few people feel better.
I guess the question
want to go beyond that and just shade it very

MR. PARRY. Well, the staff has said that the second-half's
The question then is:
growth will be 4 percent on average, right?
Does the group think, if it's going to be on either side of that, that
If
it's more likely to be less than that or more likely to be higher?
I recall the discussion, I think there were only one or two who said
they thought growth would be greater than that 4 percent.
That might
give some indication of lack of symmetry, in terms of the way we
discussed it.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We're only talking about 7 weeks.
It's a
reasonably long period between meetings, but it somehow seems like a
very long period.
If we get March set and whatever April data we have
coming in on the weak side, do we react at all?
That's the question.
MR. STERN. Well, as I read that sentence as currently
constructed, it allows us to do all sorts of things.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

I think you are right.

I don't see any reason to change it, other things
MR. STERN.
equal.
If the numbers on the real economy start coming in very weak,
I think we can respond.

-33-

4/1/86

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. JOHNSON.

I think that's--

I don't have any strong opinion.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, I don't know whether it's worth
changing the order to say somewhat lesser reserve restraint or
somewhat greater. The numbers we put in here--these are not very
rounded numbers. We've been using rounded numbers recently haven't
we?
MR. ANGELL.
Yes, that's why I'd like to have 8 percent on
the Ml.
I just think that if the economy gets weak in the second
quarter we're apt to see the March M1 numbers go the other way.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, it might sound slightly more
consistent, given the uncertainties expressed, to say 7 to 8 percent
for Ml; it has the same midpoint as in "B."
MR. ANGELL. Except that it intends to imply a range.
don't know whether that's--

And I

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We've often stuck ranges like that in
here, but it's no big deal.
MR. MORRIS.
If it really is a range, Wayne, it would have to
be a lot wider than that.
MR. ANGELL.

That's what I'm saying.

MR. BOEHNE.

It's a mushy point when we go to 7 to 8 percent.

CHAIRMAN
better to me than
between 7-1/2 and
between 7-1/2 and

VOLCKER. Well, 7 to 8 percent just sounds a little
7-1/2 percent, but it's no big deal.
The difference
8 is not very great; neither is the difference
7.

MR. ANGELL.
But with the staff's estimation of a negative
3-1/2 percent velocity, that means we want a self-fulfilling prophecy
of 4-1/2 percent or 4 percent nominal and that's not much.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. No, no.
This converts into a 9 percent or
so quarterly average.
If that's the way you measure velocity, which
is the way they measured velocity, you'd get 3-1/2

percent negative

velocity consistent with these numbers because the quarterly average
is higher.

You're starting high.

MR. JOHNSON.

Consistent with 7 to 8 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. AXILROD.

Yes.

That's

Well, I said it comes out over 9--

right:

9 percent quarterly average as

against the-MR. ANGELL.

What comes out at 9 percent?

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

The quarterly average measured growth of

4/1/86

-34-

MR. ANGELL.

Okay.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. While we're picking at these numbers, is
it worth saying 7 percent for M2 and 6-1/2 percent for M3 or should we
say 7 percent for both of them?
MR. GUFFEY.

7 percent for both.

MR. MORRIS.

About 7 percent.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. About 7 percent, unchanged. Well, I would
suggest that we say "maintain" and note in the record that reserve
pressures have eased a trifle during this period. We expect this "to
be consistent with growth in M2 and M3 over the period from March to
June at annual rates of about 7 percent; while the behavior of Ml
continues to be subject to unusual uncertainty, growth at an annual
rate of about 7 to 8 percent over the period is anticipated.
Somewhat
lesser reserve restraint or somewhat greater reserve restraint might
be acceptable depending upon the behavior of the aggregates."
I would
interpret this as $300 million [on borrowing], but play it somewhat
cautiously in the actual provision of reserves. We anticipate a
little more to ease than we anticipate to drain.
MR. GUFFEY.
I hate to ask this question, Mr. Chairman, but I
assume that the latter implies a 7-1/4 to 7-3/8 percent funds rate or
thereabouts.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
In the absence of other [unintelligible] I
don't see why it implies any change.
Although historically I think it
would have implied a lower federal funds rate relative to the discount
rate, it doesn't seem to these days.
MR. ANGELL. Well, it seems to me that if Ml and the other
aggregates were on a higher path than we anticipate, we could
accommodate some upward move in the fed funds rate.
If it's lower
than we anticipate we ought to accommodate some downward movement.
I
don't think we should pinpoint the fed funds.
It seems like-CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

It's consistent with what this says.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. The only thing I would ask is: How much
weight do we put on those rather short-term changes in the aggregates
compared to what information may be coming in simultaneously on the
economy or whatever.
MR. ANGELL.

Put "together with."

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
MR. ANGELL.

Pardon me?

Together with.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. Well, that's precisely what this says.
Is
that as close as we're going to come?
We have a funds range--well,
wait.
I was about say 6 to 10 percent for the funds range.
Is the
funds rate low enough so that we want to change that?

4/1/86

-35-

MR. JOHNSON.

Well, the Bluebook has it a little different.

MR. AXILROD.

We're suggesting the possibility of--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.

What did you say on "B"?

MR. AXILROD. We said 5-1/2 to 9-1/2 percent; that gets a
little closer to centering it.
MR. BOEHNE.

How about 5 to 10 percent, since we--

MR. JOHNSON.
MR. BOEHNE.

5 to 10 percent isn't in the range of belief.
Neither is 6 to 10 percent, but--

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. I have the feeling we should just leave it
at 6 to 10 percent because that's where it has been for a long period
of time or change it to 5 to 9 percent.
I just think that-MR. MELZER.

Leave it 6 to 10 percent.
5 to 9 percent centers it on where it is now.

MR. JOHNSON.

MR. RICE. We're not making any change, so why move it?
That's going to confuse people.
CHAIRMAN VOLCKER.
It doesn't make a lot of difference.
This
has no practical significance except a month or so from now when it is
published some newspaper article will say the Federal Reserve eased.
SEVERAL.

Yes.

MR. MELZER.

I wouldn't change it for that reason.

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. How many want to leave it 6 to 10 percent?
Eight, and those are all Committee members.
I guess the consensus is
to leave it 6 to 10 percent.
I don't think it will change anything.
All right.
With that, I guess we're ready to vote.
MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Volcker
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Guffey
President Horn
Governor Johnson
President Melzer
President Morris
Governor Rice
Governor Seger
Governor Wallich

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

CHAIRMAN VOLCKER. We have this rare event.
I don't think a
unanimous vote is all that rare but by 10 minutes after 12 it is
pretty rare.
And the lunch is set for 1 p.m. Well, I don't know
whether there are any other burning issues to be raised at this time.
The Open Market Committee meeting is over.
END OF MEETING

