Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
January 5, 1988

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.
Mr.

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Boehne
Boykin
Heller
Johnson
Keehn
Kelley
Seger
Stern

Messrs. Black, Forrestal, Hoskins, and Parry,
Alternate Members of the Federal Open Market
Committee
Messrs. Melzer and Morris, President of the
Federal Reserve Banks of St. Louis, and
Boston, respectively
Mr. Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Bradfield, General Counsel
Mr. Truman, Economist (International)
Messrs. Lindsey and Prell, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of
Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors
Mr. Czerwinski, First Vice President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
of January 5, 1988
The conference call began with a report
[Secretary's note:
from Mr. Sternlight that was not transcribed.]
In view of what we've been observing of
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
late, what I would like to do is to close out our directive of the
December 15-16th meeting by posing a rewording of the second sentence
in our draft operational paragraph, which I think all of you have
It sort of captures the report that
I'll just repeat it.
received.
we have heard today and it reads: "The Committee agrees that the
passing of the year-end should permit further progress toward
restoring a normal approach to open market operations, although still
sensitive conditions in financial markets and uncertainties in the
economic outlook may continue to call for some flexibility in
This would be in lieu of the sentence currently, or
operations."
preliminarily, in the operational paragraph which reads: "The
Committee recognizes that still sensitive conditions in financial
markets and uncertainties in the economic outlook may continue to call
Does
for a special degree of flexibility in open market operations."
anyone have any objections to that replacement?
I'm not convinced that we've progressed that much
MS. SEGER.
toward normality, myself. That's just my gut reaction.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, that's basically what the
paragraph says we should be sensitive towards.
It seems to me that that would be an appropriate
MR. ANGELL.
In fact, that's not really very far away from what we
change.
I think it makes it a little more
anticipated when we were doing it.
clear. And it seems to me, at this point, that it would be
unfortunate for us to give a wrong signal to the market that we either
have attempted to ease or have attempted to tighten. I think this
restatement gives us a continued ability to be flexible in that regard
until the next FOMC meeting and yet not over-encourage the notion that
we are pegging the fed funds rate.
I like the
MR. JOHNSON. I think the statement is fine.
idea. As you know from the last FOMC [meeting], my concern was that
trying to ease into a borrowing target didn't seem to make a lot of
sense to me. Why wouldn't we just continue to pursue the same spread
we had, and see if borrowings normalize, rather than try to hit a
I think that sentence better
borrowing number we're not sure about?
characterizes that concern.
I quite
MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, this is Mike Kelley.
agree with the thrust of the statement, but I'd raise the question of
whether using the phrase "the passing of the year-end" might not raise
questions to persons in years down the line about where that's coming
from.
I don't think there is any other clear reference to that point
in the trail we are leaving.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think the abnormalities that we
expected were discussed and will be discussed in the minutes of the

1/5/88

previous meeting, as I recall.
I think you're quite right;
better make certain that it is clear in that context.

I think we

MR. KELLEY. I may be wrong, but I don't remember a previous
reference to the significance of the year-end. We have discussed it,
of course, but is it-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes; that will appear in the minutes.

MR. ANGELL.

That will show up in the minutes.

MR. KELLEY.

I guess in the full minutes there will be some--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KELLEY.

Yes.

Okay, if that's the case then.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We will make certain that it does.

MR. ANGELL. So, what we're doing here is making a change in
the directive which does not amend the original. What we have is the
directive up to now; now we have a new directive from here to the end
of this FOMC period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's correct.
It includes the
previous directive with the substitution of this second sentence for
the old second sentence.
MR. ANGELL.
December 15-16?

But the minutes will show what we did on

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

Yes, of course.

And the minutes will now show what we're doing

now?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That is correct.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, this is Jerry
[Corrigan] in New York. I certainly would support a change. And with

respect to Governor Kelley's point, I would throw out the idea that
the sentence could read "the Committee agreed that with the passing of
time and the year-end", or something like that, but-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I have no objection to that.

Does

anybody?
MR. HOSKINS. This is Lee Hoskins. I think I agree with
moving back to this language. I guess I question doing it in this
reserve period, when there is massive intervention going on and
there's a possibility the funds rate will stay substantially above 7
percent, giving the impression to the market that we are, in fact,
evolving policy in order to support the dollar.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I think that we can make it fairly clear
that that is not the case, because it is not.

1/5/88

MR. ANGELL. Well, but you don't want any statement in the
minutes to that effect.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I don't.
I think that that would be
a very important misinterpretation of policy.
I think we would work
to avoid that becoming the market's perception. What means would be
required, I don't know; but we would do that.
MR. TRUMAN. To put it the other way around, Mr. Chairman, if
the Committee were to tighten policy because of what's going on in the
foreign exchange market, then that fact would have to be reflected in
the discussion in the policy record, as has been the case in the past.
So, I think people who are knowledgeable about our procedures would
know that the absence of any statement that there was any tightening
because of the dollar would be left with the interpretation that there
wasn't. That's essentially the status quo.
That's certainly the way
it was done, for example, in September. The September action--that
that tightening was, in part, associated with the conditions in late
August in the foreign exchange market--was clearly acknowledged in the
policy record.
MR. HELLER. For the rest of the period, where would you see
reserves and the fed funds rate in the absence of any additional
fires?
MR. STERNLIGHT. Well, we hear about continuing operational
problems, and they may be having their further effects today. I think
we will work our way past them and I'd expect to see funds coming back
down to roughly the area they were in the last few full reserve
periods.
MR. HELLER.

So, back to 6-3/4 percent?

MR. STERNLIGHT.
MR. HELLER.

And the borrowing then would be--

MR. STERNLIGHT.
very high, as I say-MR. HELLER.

About the 6-3/4, 6-7/8ths area, yes.

Well, borrowing is clearly going to average

No, I mean for the rest of the period, from now

on.

$1.3

MR. STERNLIGHT.
In the $300 million area.
or $1.4 billion in this period.
MR. JOHNSON.

It would average

No, he said the rest of the period.

MR. HELLER. For the rest of the period, from now on, it
would be $350 million--is that right?
Or $400 million?
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. HELLER.

Well, the target is $300 million.
$300 million?

MR. STERNLIGHT.

We use $300 million in the path.

MR. HELLER. $300 million.

1/5/88

MR. STERNLIGHT. As I say, mathematically, if it dropped down
to the $300 million area for the rest of the period, it would still
come out $1.3 or $1.4 billion for the period, on average, because it
averages now over $3 billion for the first, whatever it is, 5 days.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I'd like to proceed to vote.

Okay, if there are no further questions,
Normand.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Boehne
President Boykin
Governor Heller
Governor Johnson
President Keehn
Governor Kelley
Governor Seger
President Stern

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
If there are no other questions, I think
that we have completed our agenda. Unless anyone wants to pick up any
other subjects, I will assume that the meeting is closed. We look
forward to seeing you at the next Open Market Committee meeting--on
what date?
MR. BERNARD.

February 9 and 10.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

February 9 and 10.

MR. ANGELL. Just to be sure I understand: these words we
have adopted now will be shown as substitutes for the other words?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL. Right.
directive back out again?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. BERNARD.
show the vote.
MR. ANGELL.

No, both will be in the-But we're not going to put the whole
No; that won't be necessary.

Okay.
We will reproduce the operational paragraph and

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
gentlemen. Good night.

Thank you very much, ladies and

END OF SESSION

