Federal Open Market Committee
Conference Call
October 17,

PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

1988

Greenspan, Chairman
Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Heller
Hoskins
Johnson
Kelley
LaWare
Parry
Seger

Messrs. Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Dallas and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Bradfield, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations,
System Open Market Account
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of
Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant,
Division of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Governors

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Conference Call
of October 17, 1988
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Good morning, everyone. We've been
having a series of conversations with Mexican officials in recent
days. And I thought it would be useful and appropriate to discuss it
with the Committee. I'd like to call on Ted Truman to fill us in on
the details of the conversations of recent days.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I plan, Mr. Chairman, not to go into all
the details.
[See Appendix for an outline of Mr. Truman's remarks,
which were not transcribed.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I want to add that Mexico is critical to
the whole debt strategy; and fundamental to that strategy is the
underlying economic policies of the debtor nations. If Mexico can
continue to improve and ultimately become a success story--meaning
restoration of normal access to the international financial markets-it's very likely to have an anti-contamination effect, so to speak,
and have important implications for the resolution to the debt problem
in the most beneficial way. As a result, we think it's important that
Mexico be supported through this period to whatever extent is
reasonable. And we hope that (1) if the oil price stabilizes and (2)
their policies are effective, that Mexico--which led us into the debt
crisis--may very well be the country which will lead us out. The
timing of the oil price decline in sort of the "lame duck" status of
the current [Mexican] administration is an awkward period and one
which makes it rather difficult to implement significant policies. As
a consequence the agreement, which I believe was struck yesterday, has
within it I think a surprisingly reasonable number of provisions and
fallbacks which I must say I think are better than one ordinarily
would have expected during a period such as this. Are there any
questions for Mr. Truman?
MR. PARRY.

This is Bob Parry.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Bob.

MR. PARRY. In light of the tight policy and also the large
budget cuts, what is the anticipated growth for Mexico?
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. PARRY.

Next year?
Yes.

MR. TRUMAN. The new Mexican administration is not looking
for very much growth next year; maybe things will pick up in the
second half of the year--something on the order of 1 to 2 percent at
most.
MR. PARRY.

Thank you.

MR. FORRESTAL.

Mr. Chairman, this is Bob Forrestal in

Atlanta.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes, Bob.

10/17/88

MR. FORRESTAL.
In view of the political situation in Mexico,
the emergence of opposition parties and so on, with a new president
coming in on December 1st, what degree of optimism do the Mexican
officials have for a tighter monetary policy and the other measures
that they outlined, including budget cuts?
It seems to me that they
might have some difficulty in following through on these.
MR. TRUMAN. Maybe the Vice Chairman of the Board would like
to comment on the monetary policy, but the measures that were
announced on Saturday are ones that are to be implemented by this
current administration--on both the fiscal side and the privatization
side and with respect to monetary policy.
MR. JOHNSON. On the monetary policy side, they're not
excited, of course, about the prospect of having to take these
substantially tighter actions, but that was one of the conditions for
this bridge loan. And so I think the feeling wasthat even though
they had a wage-price pact that was trying to freeze prices, they
weren't getting at the condition of [aggregate] demand in the country,
which is still quite strong. Good evidence of that, even though they
have a measured lower inflation rate, is the seepage on reserves that
has picked up substantially. And I think the anticipation of a
substantial devaluation, if conditions continued, is a pretty good
So, I think
indication of the underlying inflation problem in Mexico.
it's a perfectly consistent policy to have a substantial tightening to
deal with demand and at the same time restrain the outflow of
reserves.
I think they finally realized that they can't even hold the
pact--their wage-price system that they've agreed to--together without
I think the central bank has
additional restraint on domestic demand.
been reluctant to take this action, but I think now they realize that
it is necessary and, of course, they realize too that in order to
receive this bridge financing that's a necessary action. And they
certainly have acknowledged that those pressures are there and
something other than just a wage-price freeze needs to be done.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, there is a difficult problem
that they've got, and which one would expect in this type of
environment. They have nominal peso-denominated interest rates well
in excess of 40 percent, annual rate, with a notational inflation rate
of less than 1 percent a month. Now, what is very obvious from that
is an implicit real rate of interest that makes no sense whatever in a
free market.
What we're looking at, in effect, is not only an
inflation element in the nominal interest rate but also an expectation
of devaluation. And that essentially is what is driving these
markets--that is, the markets presume that Mexico is on the edge of a
devaluation and clearly that's putting pressure on their reserves.
You can address that issue in one of two ways: either through the
fiscal side--that is, to bring down inflationary expectations which
clearly are in excess of the current inflation rate which in turn
would remove the expectation of a devaluation and bring nominal
interest rates down--or, alternatively, you devalue to a point where
expectations of further devaluation are frustrated.
The Mexicans'
concern about the latter is they assert, with some limited evidence I
must say, that should they do that the internal inflation that would
occur would offset the devaluation effects and leave real exchange
rates essentially unchanged without any alteration of expectations
involved. We think they are wrong on that issue, but that's been a
basic question which has created some differences of opinion about how

10/17/88

to proceed on this particular type of policy. As a consequence, one
cannot argue that an increase in interest rates is the wrong policy,
even though from a domestic Mexican point of view peso-denominated
real interest rates are rising, and as Vice Chairman Johnson has
indicated that's at the moment the only effective way in the short run
to try to suppress excessive internal demands.
MR. ANGELL. Mr. Chairman, I certainly support the policy and
would support the Open Market Committee agreeing to a release in this
language.
I am reluctant to have us make as strong a statement as we
do on devaluation.
It seems to me that it would be far better for
them to pay the interest rates necessary in order to avoid the
devaluation, which ultimately then can lead them to a position of
falling interest rates because those interest rates coming down have
to be in their long-run interest. And I hesitate for us to get
involved in the recommendation of a devaluation which once again
simply rewards those who have held their money-capital outside the
country and I think will reinforce that behavior. So, it seems to me
that interest rates in Mexico will have to be as high with devaluation
as they will without.
MR. JOHNSON. Governor Angell, that isn't quite what the
We're not suggesting a devaluation. As a matter of
agreement is.
fact, the whole purpose of these conditions was not to force them to a
devaluation; it was to force them to take domestic fiscal and monetary
actions to avoid a devaluation. Those are, in fact, the conditions.
MR. TRUMAN.
this agreement

I should emphasize that in the second part of

And I would hope that members of the Committee would
please keep it to themselves, so to speak. But that part of it, as
the Board's Vice Chairman said, is only if they fail in holding the
exchange rate; only then would the second part come in.
MR. ANGELL. Well, I feel better, but I'd feel better yet if
you said that the second part would be a further rise in interest
rates.
MR. TRUMAN.
I think you can be confident that if it fails
there will have to be a rise in interest rates, too, at least in the
short run.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. The basic problem is that there are
conditions under which interest rate increases don't create the type
of environment which brings stabilization; you need more than that.
And, hopefully, that won't be necessary and presumably it won't be.
But there's a fallback position, that in the event that all else
fails, you have really no choice. What happens is that if you get
into a situation in which you get a big run on your reserves,
ultimately you get to zero and you have no choice; I mean, you've got
to devalue [unintelligible] de facto moratorium.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, in addition they face, potentially, a very
large further shift in their terms of trade.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

10/17/88

MR. TRUMAN.

A normal way to deal with that--

MR. ANGELL. Well, if it gets to the place where the terms of
trade problem becomes acute, then I would grant that that's a step
I do not agree that devaluation as a technique
that has to be taken.
of stopping capital outflows is a desired solution-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
that statement.
MR. JOHNSON.

I don't think anybody disagrees with

That's what we're trying to stop.

MR. HELLER. But, Mr. Chairman, as the discussion right now
shows, I think it's very difficult to make a judgment on the
appropriateness of the program in the absence of a briefing on what's
I for one would have very much appreciated either
going on in Mexico.
to have a briefing like that or to have a background paper so we can
form some considered judgment as to whether these are appropriate
measures in the current Mexican situation. As it is now, I'm happy to
go along with it, but it's blind faith.
The second point I would like to make is in the press
release. I'm [not] exactly sure what it means at the end--that the
Treasury and the Federal Reserve are prepared to develop a short-term
bridge loan depending on the development of loan programs by Mexico
I mean, they've got to do those programs
with the World Bank and IMF.
first, then we do the bridge loan, or is it--?
MR. TRUMAN. The disbursement of the bridge loan would depend
upon having in place the appropriate loan arrangements--the
There
appropriate loan of the World Bank and the IMF to bridge to.
would be no disbursements on the bridge, at a minimum, until there was
That stage of agreement is, I think, a little open
agreement on that.
at this time, and that would be subsequently negotiated. But
essentially it [would be an] agreement that, yes, Mexico would qualify
for compensatory financing. That might be done serially--in sequence.
Or they might qualify for one of three structural loans, one a
structural adjustment loan, and two large sectoral adjustment loans
from the World Bank.
MR. HELLER. Wasn't there a whole series of them?
place already and does the second one roll in?

One is in

MR. TRUMAN. No, that's different; you may be remembering
Argentina. These are three new loans; they've had a program over the
But these
last two years of so-called structural adjustment loans.
would be three new loans that they are in process now of negotiating.
One is a structural adjustment loan addressed broadly at macroeconomic
policy and deregulation; the others are an industrial restructuring
loan and a public enterprise loan, both dealing with reforms in the
public enterprise sector.
MR. BRADFIELD.
It should be clear that these are very secure
loans from the point of view of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve.
There's almost no risk. The loans would be disbursed only when there
are appropriate assurances from the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund that their disbursements, to which we are bridging,
would be forthcoming within the period of maturity of the bridge. As

10/17/88

to the part of the loan which is a bridge to Mexican reserves, there
would be in effect a tying up of those reserves at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York as security for the bridge loan.
So there would be
absolutely no risk with respect to that part, which is bridging to
Mexican reserves.
So this is a very strong bridge and very little in
the way of true financing for Mexico. The major effect of it is our
expression of support that's contained in the statement.
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Mr. Chairman, I'd like to pick up on
that point that Mike Bradfield just made, because there are always
questions in these things, and there are always uncertainties. But it
seems to me that the case for the United States--the Treasury and the
Federal Reserve--is that this is a powerful way to support Mexico at
this point.
That's just beyond question.
I certainly would
enthusiastically support the thrust of your comment recommending the
terms of this program. It's very, very important at this juncture.
There are always questions or uncertainties on these things, but most
things get worked out.
MS. SEGER. I just have two questions.
I guess they would be
political but they're probably tied into the economics also. You
mentioned that the new president will take office December 1. In the
context of this country, anyway, to what extent can an outgoing
government commit a new government?
MR. TRUMAN. A representative of the new president--I should
have mentioned this earlier--the senior economic advisor to the new
president was a participant at the meeting. In that sense, you have a
little more commitment to the process than you would if he wasn't
participating at the meeting. And he was on the phone several times
to New York.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
board on this agreement.

Mr. Salinas has been briefed and is on

MR. JOHNSON. The fact of the matter also is, though, if they
were to fail to live up to the conditions, the bridge wouldn't be
disbursed.
We have complete control over the disbursement and if the
conditions aren't met, then they wouldn't be able to draw the funds.
MS. SEGER.
I guess I was thinking more of some of the fundamental changes that Ted alluded to in his briefing. I think it would
be hard to get those all accomplished in the next 30-some days.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, actually they are being announced
by Mr. Salinas, allegedly in last night's speech.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, the first-phase budget cuts and the
privatization program are essentially under the control of the
outgoing government. You'd probably have a document which details the
privatization program--what stages some of them are in, or bids that
have already been let, and some of them in process of development, and
so forth and so on. And the monetary policy is under the control, so
to speak, of the finance ministry and the central bank until the first
of December.
MS. SEGER. Okay, that leads me to my second question. Some
of these kinds of policies might not be terribly popular with the

10/17/88

populace. And as I understand it, the election was sort of a squeaker
anyway, if that's a fair term. So, are we maybe going to have to face
some real political instability if interest rates shoot up?
MR. JOHNSON. On that, let me just say that [unintelligible]
I agree these policies won't be particularly popular. But at the same
time, you have to consider whether the alternative would be popular.
And what Governor Angell was getting at is that their alternative is a
major devaluation that would substantially diminish the real incomes
of those people who have submitted to a wage freeze. And so you have
to take, as an alternative, a devaluation versus this. And I think
that with them seeing what their alternatives are, it makes it more
palatable for them to be willing to pursue a more restrained monetary
policy and take stronger fiscal actions and sell off more of their
nationalized firms. They're actually undertaking some fairly
impressive privatizations--the two major airlines, two major copper
companies, and I forget some of the other natural resource areas.
There's a long list that they have already received bids for and
they're prepared to accept bids on. So the numbers are fairly solid.
If all of them go through as expected, it would be about $2 billion
worth of privatizations. And a large part of that would be the two
major copper mining companies, which are very large. That is already
pretty much sealed up because the bids are already in and it's a
matter of accepting the bids.
MS. SEGER. I'm not opposed to a loan and I certainly would
believe in supporting the government. I just wonder if in 45 days
we're going to be sitting around discussing this again.
MR. JOHNSON.
MS. SEGER.

Well, there's no guarantee.
That is what I was driving at.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MS. SEGER.

That is not an inconceivable event.

Thank you.

MR. HOSKINS. This is Lee Hoskins. I'd like to hear the
language in reference to the Federal Reserve that's in the press
release and also ask who's putting out the press release, as well as a
comment or two on the extent of our involvement in these kinds of
activities in the past--bridge loan activities. And I guess, last,
what has been the experience of the Treasury and other governments on
some of these kinds of measures before? I'm just wondering if we have
any way to gauge the success of those things. It seems to me that
they have not been all that successful long term.
MR. TRUMAN. Well, I'll let the Chairman comment on the last
question. The two places where the Federal Reserve appears in this
press release are in the first sentence and the last sentence. The
first sentence is, "The U.S. Treasury Department and the Federal
Reserve welcome the economic measures recently announced by the
Government of Mexico"--that's the four points that I described about
the fiscal policy action, privatization, the tighter monetary policy,
and the applications to the Fund for compensatory drawings. I should
emphasize on that last point that the importance of that is that it
forces the Mexican authorities to enter into conversations about other
policy actions extending into 1989 that the Fund feels are appropriate

10/17/88

to their circumstances. The last sentence, with explicit reference to
the Federal Reserve, says "Accordingly, the U.S. Treasury and the
Federal Reserve are prepared to develop a short-term bridge loan of up
to $3.5 billion, depending on the development of loan programs by
Mexico with the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund." And
that was the question that I guess Governor Heller asked about the
staging of all this and the "depending on" clause.
As far as the precedents for the Federal Reserve's being
involved in these kinds of operations, there are some--in large part
because we do have, and have had for 20 years, a swap line with the
Bank of Mexico. On previous occasions like this, the Federal Reserve
has participated alongside the Treasury Department in providing this
type of short-term financial support to Mexico. We did it in 1976; we
did it in 1982-83; we did it in 1986; and it's proposed that we should
do it now. It is my personal view that these things have normally
been relatively successful, though that clearly depends on one's
standards of success.
MR. BRADFIELD. In terms of repayment, I think the U.S.
altogether has participated in approximately 15 bridge loans and every
one of them has been repaid.
MR. HOSKINS. Well, my comment was not directed to nonrepayments but was addressed-MR. BRADFIELD. No, I was just addressing that specific
aspect of it. I assumed that you were addressing the economic policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can look at the economic policy
responses in two ways. First, the fact that these Latin American
countries are continuing in significant difficulty clearly suggests,
of necessity, that [past] programs have not been fully successful. If
they were [successful] for any of them, they wouldn't be in the
particular situation they are in currently. However, it is also true
that there have been very significant improvements in the structure of
some of these economies, which were unbelievably arthritic previously.
For example, the Mexican economy is a lot more flexible, a lot more
market-oriented than it used to be. And this is true pretty much
across Latin America where very substantial changes have occurred.
That they have not been sufficient to make these wholly viable
operating economies, I guess goes without saying. But all that is
indicating is that they haven't come far enough yet; but the direction
clearly has been positive. And I think it should be the policy of
this country to be supportive of moves in that direction. But, Lee, I
think what you're saying mainly is that they haven't come out of the
extraordinarily poor state they've been in; and that's obviously the
case. I don't think, however, it is generally the case that no
progress has been made. On the contrary, I think significant progress
has been made and in that context I would say that a number, not all,
of these programs have been successful.
MR. BLACK.

This is Bob Black.

What is the timing on the

release?
MR. TRUMAN. As soon as we finish this meeting, assuming [the
Committee's view] is positive, it would be released by the Treasury
Department. Are you planning on [releasing] it?

-8-

10/17/88

MR. COYNE.

Yes.

MR. TRUMAN.
And Joe Coyne will release it here as well.
[See Appendix for a copy of the press release issued.]
MR. BLACK.
MR. TRUMAN.
MR. BLACK.

Could you send us

a facsimile copy?

We will do that.
Thanks.

MR. KEEHN.
Mr. Chairman, this is Si Keehn.
Going beyond the
bridge loan, is there any additional private sector participation
contemplated or required to deal with this?
MR. TRUMAN.
Not at this stage.
If, and this depends a lot
on the future course of oil prices and whether this works and so
forth, if you get involved in a full blown IMF program, then there
would have to be--or one would expect there to be--a bank financing
package along side that.
If things do stabilize both in terms of the
Mexican economy and the oil price and they merely go forward, which
they will in any case with these World Bank loans, it is contemplated
that there would be some parallel lending of a modest size that would
go along with that over the next two or three years, but not a big
jumbo loan in the next several months.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Are there

any further questions?

MR. MELZER.
Tom Melzer, here. I just wanted to quickly ask
what their remaining reserves are and how much $3-1/2 billion would
In other words, is there a prospect here of really
augment them.
catching the shorts and lending some support to the currency just
through the announcement?
MR. TRUMAN.

Their usable reserves are something between
at the moment.
And their total reserves are
I think the chances of
larger than that.
about
catching the shorts off guard is primarily through the announcement
effect that's been mentioned earlier and the monetary policy actions
And to the extent
that are expected to follow up on that this week.
that their government, both the outgoing government and--based on the
speech last night--the incoming government, convey a notion of
following through, then there's some chance that the situation will
stabilize.
MR. JOHNSON.
I think what they're counting on is not the
actual amount of this bridge, because as Mr. Bradfield and Mr. Truman
point out there's not a lot of up-front drawing associated with this.
What they're counting on is the statement of support from the U.S. on
top of the strong actions that they're announcing on monetary and
Really, in the short term between now and the time
fiscal policy.
that we're really dealing with it, all the burden is going to be on
monetary policy to stabilize their reserve situation through interest
rates.
It's not like it's just a pure currency crisis with no
inflation problem; they've got enough of an underlying inflation
problem to need a substantially more restrained monetary policy, as
Even though their measured rate is
the Chairman has pointed out.
relatively low, it's purely because of the wage and price controls

10/17/88

situation.
country.

There's a lot of underlying inflationary pressure in that

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You can't expect a short stampede,
largely because I don't think the markets at this stage are aware of
the size of the problem that Mexico currently is dealing with. In
fact, one aspect of this issue is that we don't know to what extent
the markets know what's happening. And this announcement in and of
itself obviously will suggest that there's something going on.
So you
can actually, in the very short run before the monetary actions take
place, conceivably have the market reacting in either direction.
MR. JOHNSON. We have some fairly significant assurances on
the monetary side. We probably laid out as conditions of this
substantially more detail [unintelligible].
As a matter of fact,
So, I think you would probably be pleased
with the degree of scrutiny we gave the mechanism by which they would
take tighter action.
MR. LAWARE.
John LaWare.
I have a question. Ted, you
talked about the privatization program--is any part of that a debtfor-equity swap?
MR. TRUMAN. Some of these operations are financed through
debt-for-equity swaps.
Some of them are in the pipeline now. They
have not approved any new ones in the last year or so, though there is
talk of their reopening that program in a mild way. But I would
expect that some of these do involve debt-for-equity swap operations
in one form or another.
MR. LAWARE.

Thank you.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
you very much.

Anything further on this?

END OF SESSION

If not, thank

