Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee

May 17, 1988

A meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee was held in
the offices of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in
Washington, D. C., on Tuesday, May 17, 1988, at 9:00 a.m.
PRESENT:

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Ms.

Greenspan, Chairman

Corrigan, Vice Chairman
Angell
Black
Forrestal
Heller
Hoskins
Johnson
Kelley
Parry
Seger

Messrs. Guffey, Keehn, Melzer, and Morris, Alternate
Members of the Federal Open Market Committee
Messrs. Boehne, Boykin, and Stern, Presidents of the
Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia, Dallas, and
Minneapolis, respectively
Mr. Kohn, Secretary and Economist
Bernard, Assistant Secretary
Bradfield, General Counsel
Prell, Economist
Truman, Economist

Mr.
Mr.
Mr.
Mr.

Messrs. Beebe, Broaddus, J. Davis, R.Davis, Lindsey,
Siegman, Simpson, and Slifman, Associate Economists
Mr. Sternlight, Manager for Domestic Operations, System
Open Market Account
Mr. Cross, Manager for Foreign Operations, System
Open Market Account

5/17/88
Mr. Coyne, Assistant to the Board, Board of Governors
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division of Research and
Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Promisel, Senior Associate Director, Division of
International Finance, Board of Governors
Mr. Keleher, Assistant to Governor Johnson, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Wajid, Assistant to Governor Heller, Office of
Board Members, Board of Governors
Mr. Whitesell, Economist, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat Assistant, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Governors
Messrs. Balbach, T. Davis, Lang, Rolnick, Rosenblum,
and Scheld, Senior Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of St. Louis, Kansas City, Philadelphia,
Minneapolis, Dallas, and Chicago, respectively
Mr. Fieleke and Ms. Lovett, Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Banks of Boston and New York, respectively
Ms. Rosenbaum, Research Officer, Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta

Transcript of Federal Open Market Committee Meeting
of May 17, 1988
[Secretary's note: No transcript exists for the first part of
this meeting, which included staff reports and a discussion of the
economic outlook. The texts of the staff reports are contained in the

Appendix.]
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We have a little problem with the
Brazilian negotiations, which has diverted Jerry Corrigan for a short
while.
He'll be back, but he asks for us to get started in any event.
I was listening rather closely to the discussion we have had, and it
strikes me that there is fairly general uniformity of views as to what
is happening to the economy.
And I think that Governor Heller's view
that what we are looking at is the elimination of the negatives as
distinct from accumulation of the positives is exactly right.
The one
thing we have to be a little careful about is that we recognize that
at some point, whenever you get a situation which is as uniformly
positive as this, it turns.
It's only a question of when it turns.
The thing that's bothering me slightly about the outlook as I look at
it--not in the negative sense but in the confirmation sense--is that,
at this particular stage in the cycle, if we are running into the type
of acceleration and inflationary process which is at the forefront of

our concerns, I think we should now begin to get some significant
inventory accumulation. We have all the forces in place for it:
namely, intermediate prices beginning to move and general awareness of
aggregate demand. Yet we are not seeing either; nor is there an
acceleration of the types of commodity prices which tend to be
reflective of imbalance in supply and demand.
I'm not arguing for the
commodity price explanation on the inflation side--where Governor
Angell is coming from--but we have not had yet the secondary followthrough on metals prices and other prices, which have since
stabilized, not as an indicator of inflation but, I think, as an
indicator of the fact that this thing is not yet accumulating. My
guess is it probably will, but I don't think the evidence is here as
yet that it has. And the data we have on lead times, while higher,
don't yet suggest the type of tightness that we see in a lot of
individual industries. This is a process that I fear is going to
create a fairly substantial acceleration at some time, but it isn't at
the moment--or at least it hasn't. I'd be very curious--for those of
you who have very specific insights on this, I would appreciate your
addressing this issue very specifically, if you would, during the
monetary discussion.
I don't think there is any question that the
next move that we have to make is on the upside. And the only
question, basically, is whether we do it now or we do it before the
next FOMC meeting on the basis of certain contingencies.
The thing I
feel a little uncomfortable with is the answer to this question: If we
weren't meeting today, on this particular date, would we be moving or
would we be waiting a couple of weeks or so?
The reason I raise the
question is that there is a market expectation which extrapolates
itself from what we do.
In other words, if we start to move sharply,
then the expectation jumps very quickly.
I'm a little concerned that
if we move too fast, we can get significantly ahead of the curve, as
has been said. And there is a stock market out there that I think
could get pretty shabby. We could get confidence reversed.
So, where I come out at the moment is basically for either:
alternative B with asymmetrical language toward tightening, with a

5/17/88

fairly explicit expectation that at the appropriate point we would
move up; or going up $100 million now on borrowing, also with that
asymmetrical language, because I think the question really gets to an
issue of whether we go up $100 million or $200 million before the next
FOMC meeting. My own preference would be for "B" with asymmetrical
language implying almost certainly moving sometime during the
intermeeting period. But I don't think there are any particular
dangers if we were to raise borrowing $100 million now. Frankly, I
think going $200 million now, on top of what we have done already, is
getting to the edge of being a little risky on the rapidity of the
movement implicit in that and the extent to which there can be market
extrapolations which occur as a consequence. Governor Johnson.
MR. JOHNSON. I'm sort of following up where I left off on
the tail end of the last discussion. I'd like to throw my hat in the
ring and concur with what the Chairman just said. When I came into
this meeting, I guess my feeling was even a little more moderate than
that; although I generally tend to be--. When I walked into the last
meeting I was for no change and the discussion convinced me that we
needed to move. This time, I came into the meeting basically feeling
that we just had voted for a $100 million increase in the borrowing
average at the last FOMC meeting and we have made another $100 million
increase in the borrowing average, which has just occurred. And the
markets have really just absorbed this move, I think. It would be
unusual, and probably a little risky, to immediately hit the market
again here at this meeting with another $100 million or more, or
something like alternative C, just as the market has absorbed--and I
think favorably absorbed--our last move. So, I guess where I was
prepared to come out was something like no change, with asymmetric
language that provides the flexibility to move toward a tighter policy
of maybe another $100 million increase in the borrowing average during
this next intermeeting period, which I think would probably be likely.
The important issue would be the timing. I still tend to favor that
approach, although I guess I could actually support a $100 million
move now. But I still think that it would be important to have the
discretion about the timing on filtering that into the market rather
than moving immediately at this meeting since we've just now absorbed
a $100 million move on borrowing. I would be strongly against going
for alternative C for a couple of reasons. One, I think this would be
a shock to the markets; they are not prepared to absorb that, and I
think they would even wonder what they're missing that we know. I
think we have better information, but I don't see the kind of evidence
that supports that kind of move. Secondly, I think it would raise
immediately in the markets an anticipation of an imminent discount
rate move. Going up $200 million on the borrowing from this point-taking borrowings up to a $600 million average, which would take the
funds rate up probably into the range of 7-1/2 percent plus, maybe
7-3/4 percent--would immediately raise expectations of a move on the
discount rate. That's something I would like to avoid. I'm not
against ultimately moving on the discount rate if we have to, but I
think the discount rate ought to be used mainly as an extra piece of
ammunition, as an important symbol for an even more serious situation,
if it arises. I would prefer that it not be simply a technical
adjustment to what has already taken place in the markets. Then we
lose the effectiveness of what we might want to do with a discount
rate move later. So, I would prefer not to create those expectations
of an imminent move in the market. We have leeway to do that still,
but I think that we have to be very cautious.

5/17/88

So my preference, once again, would be no change, with
asymmetric language and the understanding that there probably would be
an imminent move timed sometime within this next intermeeting period.
But I'd leave it up to the Chairman and the Desk to determine that. A
$100 million move now would be reasonable, but I would still prefer
that the Desk remain very sensitive to how that was filtered into the
markets, given the fact that they've just now absorbed a $100 million
increase in borrowings in the last few days.
I don't know exactly
where that puts me in terms of "A", "B", and "C"; maybe I should say
that it's probably somewhere around "B".
Although I guess my
preference is "B" with asymmetric language, I could live with a "B"
that would involve a $100 million borrowing move, with some
sensitivity on the Desk's part.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Morris.

MR. MORRIS. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think in about 95 percent
of the meetings I've attended in the last 20 years it would have been
perfectly appropriate to make a proposal for no change in the existing
policy, in the light of uncertainties that existed at the time. And I
think that's one reason why we've always tended to lag. I'm
particularly concerned, given our present structure of meetings. We
went to this eight-meeting system back at the time when we were
supposedly controlling M1 and, therefore, there was less need for
frequent consultation.
I think that ought to be reconsidered if we
are really on an interest rate control system, even though there was a
lot of sentiment against it expressed at the last meeting. To have
our next meeting at the end of June involves a long intermeeting
interval in this kind of situation. That doesn't mean that I disagree
with your recommendation that we sort of hedge our position here--go
half way, with the idea that we'll look at the incoming data in the
next couple of weeks, and perhaps decide to go whole hog. I would
suggest that the proper time would be to have a meeting after the new
orders figures are out.
If my thesis is right--that we have a head of
steam building in the manufacturing sector--then that ought to be
reflected in pretty strong orders figures. And if they're not strong,
that would be a signal for-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. We should pick that up in the purchasing
managers' survey; it's probably more sensitive than most published
figures.
MR. MORRIS.
you'd pick that up.

That's right; if you wanted to wait two weeks

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You get the lead times, and you get a
qualitative sense of the issue you are raising.
MR. MORRIS.
In terms of approaching it this way and hedging
our position--moving half way and reconsidering in a couple of weeks-that makes good sense to me. But, if we weren't going to reconsider,
I would prefer to go whole hog right now.
MR. ANGELL.

Does whole hog mean "C" or--

MR. MORRIS.

Whole hog means "C", yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

5/17/88

MR. PARRY. Mr. Chairman, you asked us to comment
specifically about inventories. I think that there probably is some
indication of accumulated inventories that are imported goods, and

that's in response to higher prices.

With regard to other goods, my

recollection of that period in the late '70s when that occurred is
that that is a bit of a lagging factor. What usually happens is that
we get some pickup in the price indexes and that begins to fuel

expectations; and we don't get the really rapid accumulation of
inventories until somewhat later.

And if that, in fact, is correct, I

think maybe waiting for that as an indicator might be a little
dangerous.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. But this is the later; we are there now.
We have already had this. Of course, we're in May and about to get
into June. We just haven't seen what has been happening in the data.
Historically, it would be happening just about now.
MR. PARRY.

Is that right?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. PARRY.

Yes.

Well, I thought there was more of a delay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I don't think so.

MR. PARRY. In any case, as I see the developments,
particularly the ones we've mentioned--unemployment, capacity
utilization, M2, the positioning in the aggregates--it seems to me
that there is a very strong case to support Bluebook alternative C.
In fact, I can't imagine a more convincing case being put before us
than the one that was put before us by the staff. There was general
agreement with the staff's forecast; some questioning about it. But
it seems to me that it is explicit in the staff's forecast that if we
delay in taking action, we're going to pay a price later--conceivably,
based upon what we know, in terms of having to move even more
aggressively. I know it has been mentioned that we've moved twice
recently. Those two moves of 1/4 of a percentage point just don't do
much. And I remember earlier times when, to get any significant
impacts on the economy, one would have had to move a lot more than a
1/4 of a point. So, my clear recommendation would be Bluebook
alternative C. I could see as something of a compromise that we move
borrowings up maybe a $100 million now. But I would hope that we
would have specific plans to talk or reconvene in a couple of weeks to
see what the intervening two weeks or so bring in terms of data,
because I think that, unless they show weakness, we should then move
again.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. With regard to policy, I think the timing
question is a very difficult one, as you suggested. The markets-certainly the stock market and maybe the bond market as well--probably
are vulnerable if we move too far too fast. On the other hand,
they're vulnerable if we delay too long. I don't know what the
precise, perfect timing for this kind of action is. What I think
about is our longer-term goal and the point I tried to make earlier:
that whatever is likely to happen on the wage and price side, it
doesn't seem to me that there's going to be any deceleration next year

-5-

5/17/88

unless we act.
I think it is time for some further action, and I
would be in favor of your second alternative, which is to go $100
million now, with an asymmetric directive, and expect that that
probably will not be a big shock to the markets.
In fact, depending
on circumstances, it could be welcomed. And then what happens after
that depends on the data that come in.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Forrestal.

MR. FORRESTAL. Well, Mr. Chairman, everything we've talked
about this morning--the forecast, the employment and unemployment
numbers, and the potential wage and price pressures--clearly and
pretty uniformly indicates, I think, that the risk is on the upside
and that we are worried about inflation. But, I don't interpret the
last two actions we took recently as being unsubstantial.
So, my
preference would be to wait before we take any further action and let
those two actions work their way through the economy.
After all, the
latest action was just a little while ago.
Now, if we hadn't taken
those actions, I'd be of a different mind. But, at the moment, my
strong preference is to wait--perhaps not very long--maybe three or
four weeks, or something like that.
So, I would like to stay where we
are with $400 million in borrowing, but with an asymmetrical
directive.
I would be prepared to support an alternative which would
move it up $100 million, to $500 million, with a symmetrical
directive. But I would have a real problem with moving all the way to
alternative C at this point.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Hoskins.

MR. HOSKINS.
I'd like to start by sort of recapping what I
see in worldwide inflation rates.
I think we are looking at a
situation where, for one reason or another, the inflation rates of two
of the major economies out there are moving up toward ours, instead of
ours moving down toward theirs. And that seems to me to be a real
loss in ground. There are reasons for that; they have exceeded their
monetary growth rate targets, partly in defense of the dollar. Those
monetary growth rates seem to be giving the kind of impetus to
spending in those economies that we would expect.
And I don't see
that going away any time very soon.
So, worldwide, we have a
potential trend that is discouraging.
In terms of our own inflation
rate--just to reiterate what I said earlier--we have been stalled at a
rate that I think is too high for most of us, at least as stated in
terms of our objective, which is price stability. Even if the staff
forecast is in error, in the sense that it's too strong on the
economy, it seems to me we're still faced with the prospect of
inflation staying at current levels or rising. And if our objective
is price stability, then we ought to begin to pursue that objective
aggressively.
With respect to movements, and the size of movements in
policy actions, I think there are several issues that surround this
discussion.
One is the credibility of policy. Policy credibility
means that markets believe you're going to do what you say you'll do.
I find it difficult to believe that markets believe our rhetoric about
price stability when the long bond rate is over 9 percent.
I don't
know what happened to it this morning, but I suspect that if I were
advising people in the market, as I did a year or so ago, I'd say that
the economy looks stronger than I thought, and that we would see a

5/17/88

rise in inflation and, therefore, a rise in interest rates. And I
would expect the bond market to be selling off. Back on the
credibility issue: if we move now, and convincingly, it seems to me
that we will have a peak in interest rates that is lower than if we
wait and go forward in incremental steps. A second point about
credibility is the issue of confusion in the public and, perhaps, in
our own minds. If we react with small moves to noisy data that come
out monthly, then I think the public doesn't understand fully what
we're trying to do. More importantly, I think it convinces us that we
have more ability to control economic activity than we really do. I
think monetary policy is a long-run policy, not a short-run policy.
So, I think the markets are not as unsure about us. We have gained
some credibility; and I think we ought to retain that credibility.
And last, I guess I ought to say, given the strength of my statement,

that I prefer alternative D.

I think I'll end there.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. I'll record you as "C" because I don't
have [unintelligible] on the other end! President Boehne.
MR. BOEHNE.
I think we have to balance the notion of where
we have to go, which I think is some tightening, without being

disruptive to the markets.

The best balancing, from my point of view,

would be to raise borrowing $100 million now. When I say now, I don't
mean tomorrow; I would think that we would have to give the Desk some
I would have
discretion to work it in over the next week or 10 days.

an asymmetrical directive that would stack the deck some in the
direction of tightening, but still wait to see incoming information.

I guess that puts me at kind of "B", "C+", with an asymmetric
directive.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. I'd like to get back to the middle of the target
range for the monetary aggregates--not do it instantly, but gradually.
I fully agree with the Chairman's views: alternative B with asymmetric
language and $100 million on borrowing.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Do you mean $100 million at some point

between--

MR. HELLER.

At some point--you feed it in slowly.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Guffey.

MR. GUFFEY. Mr. Chairman, I too would join those who have a
concern about upward interest rate movement. However, it seems to me
that the risk is on the upside, and there's enough room to take
another cut at some restraint without disrupting the markets. As a
result, I would like to associate with those who would opt for a B-C
alternative, which is the $500 million on borrowing; but I'd also
include in that asymmetrical language toward further restraint. When
I focus on moving from the $400 million to $500 million, I would just
note that seasonal credit has taken its normal track and has increased
rather dramatically since our last meeting from something less than
$100 million to--I don't know what it was at the close of this period,
but at times it was over $200 million. If you have a $400 million
objective for borrowing, and over $200 million of that is seasonal,
you really are depending upon how you view the seasonal--whether it's

5/17/88

sensitive to interest rate levels or not. I really believe that
moving to $500 million rather promptly is not a major move, given the
makeup of the borrowing level of $500 million. As a result, going to
$500 million then, with asymmetrical language, would permit us to move
on toward the C alternative depending upon what incoming information
we may have in two weeks. That would be my prescription.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I think the question that was asked for those
who want to wait is: What are you waiting to see? I think it is a
good question. I'm very sympathetic with the notion that we can give
misleading signals in regard to what it is that it appears we are
focusing on when we make the move. It does seem to me that if the
staff forecast is accurate, at some point in time the discount rate
change would be a part of such a move. And I point out that if that
were to take place, of course, it could take place at any point in
time between Open Market Committee meetings. If there are factors
that would make us think that we would need that much of a change, it
seems to me we ought not rule that out. So, I don't see that today is
necessarily the time to move. But I would have a strong preference as
to what kind of signals we use. I happen to like something in
alternative C very, very well. And what I like in alternative C are
the M2 growth paths. Frankly, I would like for us to look at those
very carefully, and, if I thought we could wait, do nothing now in
regard to a borrowing target move. That would be acceptable to me
because I don't think we know at this stage what has happened on the
money growth that would be anticipated from the moves we have made.
Certainly, April was a month we knew wasn't going to give us very
clear readings on the monetary aggregates; May looks like it might be
consistent with "C"; and if June doesn't follow that path, frankly,
I'd like to have that be the factor that would cause us to make a
move. I say that in keeping with my view that we will be able to
achieve our movement to price level stability if we do not allow the
exchange value of the dollar to fall further. I believe that an
alternative C growth path of the monetary aggregates would be
consistent with a stable dollar in the short-term horizon, and I'd
like to have that kind of restraint. But I certainly feel comfortable
in having the Chairman--he has shown already that he is responsive to
these forces and that we could make this move as we see some more
alternatives. So, it's okay with me to have a strong tilt in the
directive and to have no change today in the borrowing target,
provided there is some assurance that we will be ready to act if those
monetary growth rates do not return to what I thought was the very
good path that we had in 1987. Hindsight says that wasn't too bad.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Keehn.

MR. KEEHN. Mr. Chairman, I feel a little ambivalent,
certainly not regarding the direction, but regarding the question of
timing. We have talked about that a lot. Ed Boehne phrased it much
the way I would. I would not move on the borrowing today, because I
think it would be pretty quick after the last move and might perhaps
signal a little more to the markets than we would intend. And we want
to do this in an orderly way. So, I would bring the level up by $100
million as soon as we think the markets can accommodate that; I don't
know whether that's a week or two weeks, something like that.
Certainly, I'd be in favor of asymmetric language with an upward bias

5/17/88

in the policy directive. And I think it's not only possible, but very
likely, that we will move on the second $100 million before the next
meeting of the Committee. Whether we do that at a conference call or
leave that entirely to you, I'm indifferent.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Seger.

MS. SEGER. I'm in favor of "B", including the idea of adding
$100 million to the borrowing target eventually, for many of the
reasons that the Chairman mentioned. The main reason is, again, that
we have had these two tightening moves in very recent weeks and I'm
I'd be
not sure that the markets have fully digested those moves.
very surprised if the real economy has taken them into account or if
the monetary aggregates have begun to reflect them. Also, as I
mentioned before, I think we ought to pay some attention to the stock
I think there is a lot of nervousness still there, at least
market.
In many cases, institutions and small
among a lot of institutions.
investors have taken a walk. I haven't heard anyone mention the
thrift industry, but I think that that's a disaster area, and
Bob Boykin, I'm sure, can
something we have to pay attention to.
speak to that, as can a number of us; and too much tightening too
I can't imagine that
soon, I think, would make it a greater disaster.
the LDC debt situation would improve dramatically if we tighten too
much. Also, as I read that table on the growth of the monetary
aggregates, it seems to me that those aggregates are expected to slow
And I still think that some inventory
whether we go with "B" or "C".
I don't know when it will be--I'm not
correction is in the cards.
that smart; but I think there is some excess there that is going to be
worked off. In fact, when interest rates get higher, it just gives
I
business people stronger incentive to run with less inventory.
I think that
could live with the asymmetric language as well.
summarizes it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I think the staff has made an
It's true we have
excellent case in its forecast for an early move.
made a couple of moves recently, and I think they have been timely and
very appropriate. But I remember so many times sitting around this
table when this was the apparent stage of a business cycle where
So I think we ought
traditionally we have made our largest mistakes.
to move now. I think you've given us wise counsel in suggesting we
hold that $100 million increase in the borrowed reserve figure; and I
would buy that, with an asymmetric directive. I'd like to get rid of
I think that's unduly
that language about the unusual flexibility.
fuzzy and just confuses people. And I'd like to keep open that option
that we would go the other $100 million if, after two or three weeks,
In short, "B".
it looks as if we need to.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Mr. Chairman, when Bob Forrestal spoke a few
minutes ago I wish that I had been the next one on the list and I
I think that it's a time to wait,
could have simply said "me too."
given the evidence to date and the two recent moves, which I agree
I would be in favor of "B" and keeping the
were not insignificant.
same borrowing for now, with asymmetrical language. But, as Bob

5/17/88

suggested, I'd be comfortable with going an additional $100 million
now with symmetrical language.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boykin.

MR. BOYKIN. I agree with the position that has been stated
I'm a "B-", "C+", however you
by you, Mr. Chairman, and others.
I guess
characterize it, with the $100 million increase in borrowing.
I would be inclined to move sooner rather than later on the $100
million.
If I had the real courage of my convictions, as Lee Hoskins
does, I would really like to line up with him. I guess I just don't
have that much courage, given the situation I have down there in the
Southwest. But, I think he makes a very, very good point that policy,
and what it is that we can do, has to be viewed in the longer run.
And I think when we temporize and rationalize some of the short-run
problems we think would result from taking actions, that's not really
communicated and tends to compound the problems over the longer range.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, my instincts probably are the
same, but I think that for financial market reasons, if nothing else,
I'd be willing to sneak up on it. To me, that would mean do the $100
million now with asymmetric language, although I could live with an
arrangement in which you and Peter have some flexibility in terms of
But, certainly, I feel very strongly
edging that $100 million in.
that we should get that first $100 million in promptly. I think that
the two changes in policy that have been made in the last several
weeks or so clearly have been viewed favorably by the markets as an
indication that we are indeed prepared to respond to these conditions.
But I agree with Bob Parry that, insofar as the economy is concerned,
I think that Don Kohn
I doubt that they've done much of anything.
made that point in a way, earlier on, when he pointed out that nominal
and real interest rates--even after those moves--are precious little
different from what they were a year ago. And in the intervening
year, the economy has grown at a rate that simply won't work
prospectively.
I also have a nagging fear here--I don't know what the
staff's views on this are--that because of these highly mobile money
and capital markets on a worldwide basis, that it may take a higher
level of interest rates to achieve a given degree of restraint in the
real world. And if that were the case, our problems that lie ahead,
especially in the context of Governor Seger's comments about thrifts
and a lot of other things, would be all the more difficult and all the
more damaging. It is precisely for that reason that I feel so
strongly that moving now is the right thing to do.
I agree with
comments made by Governor Johnson, I think before the coffee break,
and by Lee Hoskins a few minutes ago: that we've got to avoid fine
tuning here; the broad thrust of developments over the next six or
seven quarters is what we have to keep in mind. And that, too, says
to me that we ought to move now.
I also agree with Governor Johnson
on the discount rate question. In the situation that we have right
now--where we're on the upside of the cycle and where we don't have to
worry about frictional levels of borrowings--I don't see that there is
the same kind of prejudice for a discount rate [increase] that there
was on the downside, where we run into that frictional borrowings
problem. So, I don't see that there is any presumption whatsoever, at
least in my judgment, that if we moved--perhaps even as far as a fullblown "C"--that that would create a strong bias toward having to move

5/17/88

-10-

the discount rate. Indeed, at the phase of things that we're in, like
Governor Johnson, I personally--not that I have a final say on the
discount rate--would try to keep our powder dry on the discount rate
and work through the market as much as possible. I think that does
two things: One, it minimizes the dangers of market disruptions; and
secondly, it leaves us in a stronger position if something really
adverse develops in the next month or two, or whatever. To summarize,
Mr. Chairman, I would do the $100 million now, with an asymmetric
directive. That's it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Melzer.

MR. MELZER. I've followed the moves that have been taken,
but my sense is that, in effect, they are rather small following
moves. I think at some point we're going to have to step out in front
of this situation if everything we've heard today is correct. And
that's going to take something more on the order of alternative C.
The timing issue has been talked about.
I would guess--and again, Mr.
Chairman, I think you did the right thing by moving within your
latitude--that if you had the benefit of all this discussion you might
have moved it a full 50 basis points, and we wouldn't get into two
increments of 25 basis points. Because of this view that I think we
have to get in front and make a strong statement, I would favor "C";
but I could certainly accept a "B" with asymmetrical language--$100
million now and $100 million later.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. As I tabulate the results, everyone here
believes, as best I can judge, that the next moves are higher. The
only thing that basically differs here is whether we move now or move
in a short period. What I would like to suggest is that, if I've
written down correctly what I heard from everybody, there seems to be
a consensus for alternative B and asymmetrical language, with a fairly
strong willingness--desire, if I can put it that way--to give
instructions to the Chairman and the Desk to move before the next
period. I would interpret that to mean that, unless we see events
which clearly are contrary to the general consensus of the outlook as
one hears it today, it's almost an automatic increase. There is a
strong, and I think convincing, case that is being made that we should
not, under any conditions, allow ourselves to get behind the power
curve on this question. And I would say further--in line with the
issue Frank raised about the frequency of meetings--that should
anything of moment arise that suggests the need to have a telephone
meeting, I think we should. That would substitute for having to come
to grips with this rescheduling question. I don't think there's any
doubt that we are in a very sensitive policy period; and I think that
close discussion and judgments are probably going to be needed at
intervals shorter than our scheduled FOMC meetings. So, what I'd like
to suggest, and I hope that Norm would find the appropriate language-I'm sorry, there's one thing I did forget. Unfortunately, I only got
from President Black his judgment about that sentence; we did not get
any other appraisals on leaving that sentence in or dropping it out.
I think we'll go around on that question before we take our vote.
Normand, why don't you just-MR. BERNARD.
Vice Chairman Corrigan

Out

5/17/88

-11-

MR. JOHNSON.

Before we do,

[please

read the

sentence].

MR. BERNARD.
The Committee agrees that the current more
normal approach to open market operations remains appropriate; still

sensitive conditions in financial markets and uncertainties in the
economic outlook may continue to call for some flexibility in
operations.

percent?

MR. HOSKINS.
What about the 5 to 9 percent or 4 to 8
Do you want to do that at the same time or not?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. ANGELL.
appropriate.

In a certain sense--

It seems to me that 5 to 9 percent would be more

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.

Well, no.

5 to 9 percent is clearly--

I just wanted to bring it up and make sure we

didn't-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
and "C"; so it's automatic.

Yes, but 5 to 9 percent is in both "B"

MR. BERNARD.

Governor Angell
President Forrestal
Governor Heller
President Hoskins
Governor Johnson
Governor Kelley
President Parry
Governor Seger

Out
Out
Out
Out
In
Out
Out
In

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
It's clearly [the preference of] the
majority for it to be out.
Anyhow, what I'd like to do is have a
vote. Why don't you-MR. BERNARD.

Do you want me to try to read this?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
his writing so-MR. BERNARD.

I can't;

I've never been able to read

I'll give it a try.

Unless maybe it would be

better-MR. KOHN. Or do you want me to?
Sometimes I can't read my
writing either. By the way, Mr. Chairman, I think it could be
handled, if you wanted to, by just having the maintain and then the
tilt in the sentence. But it would be understood, and made clear in
the policy record, that the Committee expected to move. But if you
wanted to state something more clearly in the operational paragraph,
my suggestion is as follows: Taking account of conditions in financial
markets, the strength of the business expansion, indications of
inflationary pressures, developments in foreign exchange markets, as
well as the behavior of the monetary aggregates, the Committee
expected that a slight increase in the degree of pressure on reserve
positions would be appropriate in the weeks ahead. Depending on

-12-

5/17/88

further developments in these factors, somewhat greater reserve
restraint would or slightly lesser reserve restraint might--and then
you'd have to be clear with the end of that tilt--be acceptable later
in the intermeeting period.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I'm sorry, I think you're putting the--

MR. KOHN. So, the first sentence has maintain in it; and
then, taking out the sentence in brackets, the second sentence says
taking account of all those things the Committee expects that a slight
increase in the degree of pressure on reserve positions will be
So, I presume that that means if
appropriate in the weeks ahead.
those things don't come in the way we expect, it wouldn't be
[appropriate].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
strong asymmetrical statement?

that.

In other words, it's a fairly

MR. KOHN. Well, no; it's a statement actually stronger than
It says we expect that a firmer-MR. HELLER.

It's drifting up.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. STERNLIGHT.

The timing.

And the maintain would only be initially.

MR. KOHN. Right; it says "in the implementation of policy
for the immediate future the Committee seeks to maintain the degree of
pressure on reserve positions."
MR. BLACK.

Initially; maintain initially.

Initially, okay. And then, taking account of all
MR. KOHN.
these things, the Committee expects that a slight increase in the
degree of pressure on reserve positions will be appropriate in the
weeks ahead.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.

Not will be, would be.

Would be, okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
contingency here.

I had would originally.

Because there is,

MR. JOHNSON. We could be surprised.
right; that's correct.

in effect, a
The subjunctive is

MR. KOHN. And then I have depending on further developments
in these factors--[that's not] the right word, I'll think of another
word--somewhat greater reserve restraint would or slightly lesser
reserve restraint might also be acceptable later in the intermeeting
period.
MR. ANGELL. So you have a preponderance of a move and a tilt
also?

-13-

5/17/88

MR. KOHN. A strong supposition of a move unless things were
surprising, and then the possibility of [a further move], but there's
a tilt in the possibility.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Anybody object strongly to that

language?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I have trouble with it.

How would you rephrase it?

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I would have the first sentence say
the Committee seeks to increase slightly the degree of pressure on
reserves.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

But that's not what the majority is.

Majority.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. I understand that, but you asked me
what I would prefer. That's what I prefer.
I'm asking the question of
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Oh, okay.
whether I've captured the sense of the majority.
MR. HELLER.
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, that's good.
It did mine.

MR. ANGELL. It seems to me that that's a very appropriate
response. And as I understand it then, that almost means that we
would expect maybe a telephone conference call if we don't do it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. No, I would not say expect;
if we don't, that would require one.
MR. ANGELL.

I would say

There would be a telephone conference.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

It requires a telephone conference.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, could I ask for some estimate of
the length of time before we move?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BLACK.

Two weeks.

At the most?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Yes.

MR. BOEHNE. Mr. Chairman, I guess it all depends on how one
listens to things, but I had the sense that there was a majority of
people who wanted some tightening, say, in the next couple of weeks.
And it would seem to me one way to do that would be to say in the
implementation of policy etc., the Committee seeks to increase
slightly the degree of pressure on reserve positions in the immediate
weeks ahead.

5/17/88

-14-

MR. ANGELL. But, Ed, the count was four people who favored
an immediate tightening.
MR. BOEHNE. But it's not immediate; it's spread over the
next couple of weeks.
MR. ANGELL.
voting members.

No, no.

I'm just talking about a count of the

MR. BOEHNE.

Oh.

MR. ANGELL.

There were four members.

MR. BOEHNE. But I think if you counted the people who wanted
a tightening immediately, plus those who are willing to have some
flexibility over the next week or two, you would have a majority.
And, therefore, if you are a little vague about whether you do it
right away or within the next-MR. HELLER.

Are you talking about the Committee or the whole

group?
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. BOEHNE.

Well, I didn't keep that accurate a score.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
Committee [participants].
MR. BOEHNE.

He's talking about all the participants.

I think you're correct on the total

I see.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
the voting members].

I don't think it comes out that way

MR. BOEHNE.

All right.

MR. KELLEY.

Six; and six are voters.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. HOSKINS.
two weeks and then-MR. ANGELL.

[for

Unless I'm mistaken.

Can we poll for a $100 million over the next
Sure.

MR. HOSKINS.

Of the voting members?

MR. JOHNSON.

We can certainly clarify that.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Yes.
We might as well because we are
very explicit on exactly what the difference is. We can do that. So,
let me tell you what the language is and what the actual difference
is.
The question basically is the issue of $100 million now or $100
That's what the
million in, say, two weeks, unless some event occurs.
difference basically is in this particular group. Would that be the
view?
MR. BLACK.

That's right.

-15-

5/17/88

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. In either event, there is asymmetric
language in the directive over and above this. Okay, why don't you
poll on that very specific question.
MR. BERNARD. Okay.
$100 million now versus $100 million in
two weeks.
Chairman Greenspan
Two weeks.
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Now, but I could live with two
weeks.
Governor Angell
Two weeks.
President Black
Now, but I can also live with
two weeks.
President Forrestal
Two weeks.
Governor Heller
Two weeks.
President Hoskins
Now, but $100 million is not
enough.
MR. JOHNSON.
MR. HELLER.
MR. BLACK.
MR. ANGELL.

$100 million is not enough?
Two weeks ago.
You haven't ruled out the $200 million, have you?
No, no.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
No, we haven't, because we don't have
enough votes for that to have-MR. BLACK.
No, but I mean over time, after you've moved the
$100 million, if these contingencies-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Well, we still have asymmetric language.

MR. ANGELL.
That's right, so it could be
and $100 million [more] before the next meeting.
MR. JOHNSON.
intermeeting period.
MR. BLACK.

$100 million now

It's possible to have $200 million within the

That's the point

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

MR. BERNARD.
Governor Johnson
Governor Kelley
President Parry
Governor Seger

Yes;

I was making.

that's correct.

Two weeks.
Two weeks.
Now.
Two weeks.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. That's the same vote that I got before.
So, unless I'm mistaken, that is captured by Don Kohn's language.
MR. BOEHNE.
Oh, it is captured; it just makes it a little
stronger. It puts it right up front that you intend to tighten within
two weeks.

5/17/88

-16-

MR. JOHNSON. But that's with [unintelligible] any
contingency. And we want to keep in some contingency; it's not very
likely, but there is a contingency.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. You know, there's a difference.
I think
we're pretty clear on what the consensus is.
That language is not in
the public domain, in any event, for six weeks; and I don't think that
there are ambiguities on what the instructions to the Desk and
Chairman are in this respect.
Why don't you read the directive as we
now have it.
MR. BERNARD. Mr. Kohn just suggested one additional word at
the start: In the initial implementation of policy, the Committee
seeks to maintain the existing degree of pressure on reserve
positions. Taking account of conditions in financial markets, the
strength of the business expansion, indications of inflationary
pressures, developments in foreign exchange markets, as well as the
behavior of the monetary aggregates, the Committee expects that a
slight increase in the degree of pressure on reserve positions would
be appropriate in the weeks ahead. Depending on further developments
in these factors somewhat greater reserve restraint would be
acceptable or slightly lesser reserve restraint might be acceptable in
the-MR. KOHN.

Thereafter.

MR. BERNARD.
MR. KOHN.

Mike Prell just suggested--

Later weeks of the period?

Yes, I said later in the intermeeting period.

MR. BERNARD. Later in the intermeeting period. And then I
guess we need some numbers on the monetary aggregates.
The
contemplated reserve conditions are expected to be consistent with
growth in M2 and M3 over the period from March through June at annual
rates of-MR. ANGELL.
MR. JOHNSON.
them to matter much.
MR. ANGELL.

Let's take the "C" numbers.
There's not enough difference between any of
I know, but that's--

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. BERNARD.
to 7 percent.
MR. ANGELL.

6 to 7 is right; that stays in.

March to June?
March through June at annual rates of about 6

Why do we use March to June rather than May to

June?
VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN.
MR. BERNARD.

You don't know what May is yet.

That's the usual way it has been done.

5/17/88

-17-

MR. ANGELL. Well, I know; but it seems to me that what you
already have behind you, you can't alter.
I thought maybe-CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.

How about May to July?

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.
impression.

Really.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. ANGELL.
MR. KOHN.

That period.

You know, really it shouldn't-Because otherwise you convey a mistaken

Don, is there any reason why?

Why not May to July?
May to July?

MR. ANGELL.

Yes.

MR. KOHN. Well, generally we focus on a quarter at a time.
We'll be meeting again at the end of June, so I'm not clear why you'd
want to specify-MR. ANGELL.
MR. KOHN.

I know.

But what we do in June--

The July growth rate won't--

MR. ANGELL. But what we do in June can't affect June's
growth rate or even July's growth rate.
MR. KELLEY.

Just say the intermeeting period.

MR. KOHN. But there's very little information that will come
in between now and then that will tell us very much about July's
movement.

July.

MR. ANGELL.
So I'd prefer to say 4 to 6 percent from May to
That would give some indication here of what we're-MR. KOHN.

Do you mean April to July?

MR. PRELL.

Do you mean April to July?

Because we don't

know-MR. ANGELL.

Yes, April.

Right; that would be a quarter.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Can I suggest that we make that change
at the next FOMC meeting, because you're actually raising more
difficult questions.
Let's stay with what we have; let's do 6 to 7
percent March to June, but resurrect this issue because I think
Governor Angell is raising a quite legitimate question.
MR. BERNARD.

And the funds range?

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman?
I have one question: Did we mean
to have maintain initially? We talked about that and I thought we
sort of--

5/17/88

-18-

MR. JOHNSON. Yes, I thought it was. The way that statement
reads there's a lack of contingency in there, but I may have missed
something.
MR. KOHN. The contingency came after "the Committee"; there
was an "initially" in the first sentence, Bob, and then-MR. BLACK.
MR. KOHN.

It was; but it wasn't when Norm read it.
Yes.

MR. JOHNSON.
MR. BLACK.

He did?

MR. JOHNSON.
MR. BLACK.

Yes, he read "initially" the last time.

Yes.

Well, I missed that one, too.

I'm sorry, Norm.

MR. BERNARD. Yes, it would start "in the initial
implementation of policy".
MR. BLACK.
I couldn't find it.
"maintain".

Oh! You had it in a different place; that's why
I'm sorry--I was looking for it down near the

MR. KOHN. Governor Johnson, there is a contingency toward
the end; it relates to the remainder of the intermeeting period.
MR. JOHNSON.

Well, okay.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

We can vote.

MR. BERNARD.
Chairman Greenspan
Vice Chairman Corrigan
Governor Angell
President Black
President Forrestal
Governor Heller
President Hoskins
Governor Johnson
Governor Kelley
President Parry
Governor Seger

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Anybody have any objections to
discussing the monetary base over sandwiches?
[Short recess]
MR. MELZER.
[Unintelligible] because I think it tends to
support [the view] that there is a desirability of having such a
Now, one argument you can make is one that was in the
constraint.
follow-up memo I sent around, and I think we've just witnessed it in
our discussion. And that is the difficulty of coming to grips with,
in effect, targeting interest rates; it is difficult to deal with that
process without some tool that enables you to take a longer-term view,

5/17/88

-19-

which I think the constraint does. Don, having complimented you on
your memo, let me just say--I'm not going to criticize--but I can't
really say any better than it was said in that memo why I think this
type of constraint would be desirable. This is on page 10:
"Generally, periods of rapid growth in the base in recent years have
been followed, with a lag, by a tightening of monetary policy. In
some cases (1983, 1986) these have been periods in which the Federal
Reserve had been easing. Greater attention to the base might have
tempered the degree to which policy was previously eased, reducing the
need for subsequent tightening, and damping the cyclical variations in
interest rates, albeit at the expense of somewhat greater short-term
I think that in a nut shell makes the case
interest rate volatility."
right there. Again, I'd say that just the short experience I've had
here on the Committee would tend to support that.
With respect to the question of targets versus a constraint,
I personally would be much less inclined to adopt a base target. Now,
I think you could say that the base might have an advantage in that it
is more directly controllable than any of the other aggregates that we
presently target. Its relationship to our ultimate goals of policy is
not better. And I guess I fear, and it's implied in Don's memo, that
if we just decide here today, let's say, to set target ranges for the
base instead of M1, we're actually going to hurt ourselves in the
process. If it is treated as the other aggregates have been--in
effect, that we set the target but then we're willing to violate it--I
think that could do more harm than good, frankly, to the credibility
of this process. So, I'm not saying there aren't any circumstances
under which I would ever favor a base target, but I don't think this
is the right time. I don't think the econometric analysis could
support that being the desirable thing to do.
With respect to the constraint itself, there's a suggestion
of a four-quarter moving average, which troubles me in this sense: I
think it basically defeats the purpose of what the constraint does,
which is to put some real limits on how fast or slowly the base can
grow in any one quarter. Technically, with the 5 to 9 percent that
has been used for demonstration purposes, if you will, with a fourquarter moving average you could have base growth rates of 20 percent,
20 percent, -2 percent, -2 percent, and back to 20 percent. In
effect, you could have the same kind of volatility and still meet the
constraint and, I think, suffer the adverse economic consequences that
that kind of volatility in base growth occasions. Also, I think this
four-quarter moving average would have some of the same potential
problems as an annual target--namely, that if the base grew very
slowly for two or three quarters, or very rapidly for two or three
quarters, and you were approaching the end of the four-quarter moving
average period, you'd be faced with a decision of whether to adjust
the growth abruptly in the base to stay within this constraint, or to
ignore it. I think our experience has shown us that, typically,
that's a hard decision to make. And I think that, too, could
undermine the credibility of this [procedure].
I guess there are two points I'd like to make in connection
with this. When I suggest this 5 to 9 percent range, or whatever, I'm
not saying that it should never be ignored. I think, in practice, it
probably would be observed most of the time. But there could be
situations where we choose to ignore it and, as has been pointed out,
those situations very likely would be associated with the behavior of

5/17/88

-20-

currency. But that's something we can observe.
Our analysis on
currency has indicated that where there have been aberrations in the
growth rate, they have tended to be reversed within a quarter or two.
But if we had a situation like that, I think it would be related to
broad economic circumstances that we would generally understand and
could explain; and we could very easily justify violating the
constraint. But, in general, I don't think it would be violated. The
final point I would like to make is that I agree with the work that
Don and the others did in terms of the nonborrowed base--that from the
controllability point of view it would have an advantage.
I guess
what I'm not so sure about is whether we lose something in a
conceptual sense, because the base is something people are familiar
with. Do we lose something in the conceptual sense to go to a more
I could live with either
esoteric concept like a nonborrowed base?
one, but I prefer the base and not the nonborrowed base; I'd live with
the short-term controllability problem as, over time, I think it can
be controlled.
I think that's all I would care to say right now, Mr.
Chairman.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
MR. KOHN.
Appendix.]

Mr. Kohn.

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

[Statement--see

MR. HOSKINS. Well, I think the proposal deserves serious
consideration.
I'm not wedded to the base itself. Given the
objections that some of the Board's staff have raised, I think the
nonborrowed base would do the same thing that we're trying to
accomplish.
I think what we're trying to accomplish with this kind of
a proposal is to tie our hands, to some extent; and in doing so, I
think we would give some assurance to the markets that, in fact, we
will react in a certain way over time. Another thing we need to
address is that we would also have to make it public--if it's to work
appropriately--to get the markets to do our work for us, as the market
If we used
did when we had a nonborrowed reserve targeting procedure.
the quarterly average approach, and it looked like the month or two
coming in were going to push the quarter above that constraint, the
market would perceive that and begin to push interest rates up itself.
I think
So, [this approach] would allow us to curb the base growth.
we'd have an override of the FOMC, if conditions warranted. We'd have
If you wanted
to take an explicit vote and that has an advantage too.
to make that tougher, you could require a two-thirds majority, or
something of that nature, so that it would be a real constraint on us,
a more difficult constraint.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
procedure.

If you can get a majority for the whole

I would suggest, if we have some agreement on
MR. HOSKINS.
it, that we at least look at doing a monitoring of it, if not a range.
I know Tom didn't want to put a cone out there, but the market will
very quickly draw parallel lines and also draw a cone. You have
parallel lines, which is basically what you're projecting as a range,
and people will start in the middle of those parallel lines and begin
to figure when the base is going to bump against either the ceiling or
the bottom end.
So, I don't think it is going to be a real issue,
I think the markets are going
whether we put a range in there or not.
to interpret it correctly as a governor, if we announce it as such and

-21-

5/17/88

if we react that way. So, I think there is some reason for us to
consider this, and maybe even set up the monitoring approach as early
as the next Humphrey-Hawkins [meeting].
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Morris.

MR. MORRIS.
Well, I have a contrary opinion.
I think what
we have learned in our adventures with M1 is that, if a monetary
aggregate is not predictably related to nominal GNP, it is not a
useful indicator for monetary policy. We went through a number of
years with M1 in which the Committee had to set aside M1 as a target,
then later reinstate it, hoping that it would again become a
predictable indicator of nominal GNP.
And then we finally removed it
entirely. I think if you look at Tom's chart at the back of his memo,
it's pretty clear to me that, if we had had a monetary base target in
1980, we would have had to get rid of the monetary base for the
If you look at
precise reasons we had to get rid of M1 as a target.
the growth rate of the monetary base in the fourth quarter of 1982 and
the first quarter of 1983, you'll see that it was running around 12
percent--3 percentage points above the top of the limit. Given the
fact that the ratio of currency to reserves is about 2-1/2 to 1, it
would have taken an extremely tight monetary policy to push that rate
of growth back within the 9 percent ceiling. And I would point out
that the fourth quarter of 1982 was the bottom of the worst recession
we've had in this country since the 1930s.
It's inconceivable to me
that this FOMC, or any other FOMC, would have thought it sensible to
have followed a much more restrictive policy in the fourth quarter of
1982 and the first quarter of 1983. We already had classically high
interest rates.
I don't know what federal funds rate would have been
required to push the monetary base growth back to 9 percent, but it
obviously would have been a lot higher than 20 percent, because 20
percent was not doing it.
MR. MELZER. Frank, to some extent, though, there would have
been reaction to the very slow growth of the base that took place all
the way through 1981 and a good deal of 1982.
MR. MORRIS. All right;
react at this particular time.
MR. MELZER.

Well,

but your system would require us to

I know; but you can't just pick up on

some-MR. KOHN. If [there had been]
might not have had the reaction-MR. MELZER.
MR. KOHN.

some reaction in 1981, you

That's all I'm saying.
Yes, but we can't play with what's--

MR. MORRIS. Well, let's take a look at 1986 then.
In the
years immediately preceding it, we were within the band; we weren't
way below except for one point in 1984.
So, you can't argue in the
case of 1986 that we would have been making up for a big shortfall,
because there wasn't a shortfall. Yet, here again, this constraint
would have required us in 1986 to have followed a substantially more
restrictive monetary policy. Now, 1986 was the year in which the
average unemployment rate was 7 percent; the rate of growth of nominal

-22-

5/17/88

GNP was 2.2 percent; the rate of growth of the GNP deflator was 2.2
percent.
I submit that anything that indicates that we should have
followed a severely more restrictive monetary policy in 1986 does not
meet my requirements for a common sense monetary policy. And I think
the Committee would have abandoned it again in 1986.
MR. MELZER. Frank, do you know what reserves would have
grown at in 1986 to meet the constraint on a quarterly basis?
The
answer is: 9 percent, 14 percent, 13-1/2 percent, and 12 percent. And
that would have brought us inside the constraint.
To me, that is very
healthy reserve growth, taking into account what currency did. And it
may well have necessitated much less of a reaction in the other
direction in 1987.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

What was the actual reserve growth?

MR. MELZER. It was 16 percent for 1986: 9.1 percent in the
first quarter; 16.6 percent; 19.3 percent; and 19.4 percent.
MR. MORRIS. And that is because M1 was growing very rapidly.
These two are closely related indicators and they have the same
components.
You have currency plus the reserves against transactions
deposits as against currency plus transactions deposits. And they're
going to tend to move in a fairly similar fashion. The weight of
currency is different. But, as you argue, where the base departs is
typically where you have unusual growth in deposits.
So, you can't
expect M1 to be something we had to get rid of as a target, and the
monetary base, which is so closely related, to be something that would
have given us a good guide to monetary policy during this period.
It's hard for me to conceive that we would have gone through this
period and not have been faced with a situation of either discounting
the base as an indicator, or following a policy which, given the
economic conditions, would have been a policy that was much too
restrictive for the situation.
MR. MELZER. Again, Frank, one thing I would point out is
this difference between a constraint and a target.
If you were
targeting the base, I don't know that you'd be setting a 4 or, as Don
even mentioned, a 5 percentage point range. And in my mind, there is
a big difference.
If you widen that range out and you're only trying
to pick up the excesses at the peak, that's a lot different than
relying on a target.
The second thing I would-MR. MORRIS. But doesn't your system require that you try to
get below 9 percent once you get above it?
MR. MELZER.
to get above it.

That's correct.

Well--or you wouldn't allow it

MR. MORRIS. Well, I just think your own evidence suggests
that it's not a workable guide to monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Heller.

MR. HELLER. I found both papers very interesting and really
helpful.
I think it would be very confusing to the public at large,
and especially to Congress, if we had two different types of monetary
control procedures--one a target and the other one a constraint. If

-23-

5/17/88

we ask ourselves why monetary targets were introduced in the first
place, they were certainly not introduced or requested by Congress
because they thought those were just some guidelines that we could
flop over and under. There was clearly the intent that they be some
kind of constraint, however binding. And if we suddenly introduce a
second set of numbers--one set a constraint and one set a target--I
think the public legitimately will ask what we are doing. Which one
do you really take seriously?
So the confusion that would result, I
think, would be great. I think it would be useful, however, to
include the monetary base among the other monetary targets, but I'd
treat it on the same level as the existing targets. And one thing
that's important, too, is what Don Kohn was saying--namely, that the
behavior is likely to change once you introduce it as a target. For
certain, once you introduce it as a constraint, the old statistical
relationships probably won't hold anymore. In any case, that's where
I would come out: I'd treat the two the same. I'd be in favor of
having something on the short end, and because M1 probably misbehaves
a little more than the base, the base is the better candidate at the
short end of the spectrum.
MR. MELZER. Well, the only problem I have with that is that
it just puts it in a category of things that don't really impact our
policy decisions at all. I don't think the targets have a heck of a
lot of credibility either within this room or outside this room. And
I think what is proposed has the ability really to influence policy
actions, at the extremes, in a very constructive way. And I don't
know that you get that with what you're suggesting. It would be
easier to explain; there's no doubt about it.
MR. HELLER. Well then, let's rename all the targets; let's
call them all constraints or something like that. You know, I take
the range seriously as [the growth rates] get closer to the borders,
it influences the way I vote on the current monetary targets. But I
don't take them as an absolute, if all other things would indicate
going the opposite way. As President Morris was saying earlier: Would
you go voluntarily into a recession that would otherwise not be
necessary only to stick to that constraint? And the answer would be
no.
Immediately, you already set up these escape clauses too. So, I
think they are very much the same as the monetary targets; and if
they're not the same, then we should take the monetary targets as
seriously as we take the constraint. I'm in favor of looking at it;
among the various options that you have there, I would be strongly
inclined not to call them two different things.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Parry.

MR. PARRY. I found both papers very interesting, but I have
some analytic questions that I think are relevant, as far as whether
or not the base should be considered as either a target or a
constraint. The work done by the Board staff suggests that the
statistical properties of the monetary base are superior to those of
other aggregates. The work we have done suggests just the opposite.
As a matter of fact, the statistical properties of the base are
inferior to those of M2. We have a much larger interest rate
elasticity on the monetary base and our income elasticity of M2 is
significantly less than that [for the base].
The difference appears
to be a function of the period of estimation. The period of
estimation in the Board's forecast goes back to the very early 1960s

5/17/88

-24-

and goes through the entire period. We think that the interest rate
elasticity has probably increased in recent years and on the basis of
our estimates, which run from 1978 through 1987, we find that the base
actually has inferior statistical properties to M2. In any case, it
appears as though there are significant amounts of shifts in the
statistical properties that occur and I'm not sure we've paid enough
attention to those kinds of shifts. They certainly could affect how
reliable the monetary base could be as either a current constraint or
a target in the period ahead. I guess I'd say that even though there
has been a lot of analytical work done, maybe we ought to do a little
more.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Black.

MR. BLACK. Mr. Chairman, I have a lot of sympathy with what
Tom is trying to do because I think his ultimate objective is to
achieve price stability. I don't know how this Committee would vote
on that, but I remember several years ago Chairman Volcker asked us
what we thought the objective was and half of us voted for price
stability alone; half voted the other way; and he didn't vote and
didn't break the tie. But I think that is the ultimate objective, and
I hear more and more people around here saying that. And I think Tom
is trying to create a constraint that will make us really work toward
that objective and not lose sight of it. But my problem with it is
that even though he thinks this is a constraint, I believe, in
practice, that it really might end up being used like a target. And
our analysis, like Bob Parry's, suggests that M2 is really better for
this in the sense of predicting the level of long-run inflation. And
that, I think, is the thing we really ought to look at, rather than
how well it predicts nominal GNP, since I don't think we can peg real
variables over the long run. All we can do is affect the price level.
So, what I would like to do is to carry the thing a step further than
Tom has, and suggest we think about using total reserves and
nonborrowed reserves, or something of that sort, as an operating
instrument. What we have now is very akin to using free reserves,
which has been fraught with problems the whole time. I know that
there are some institutional changes that will improve this--you could
get rid of the reserve requirements against interbank deposits,
[unintelligible] deposits, nonpersonal deposits, all those things.
You could have a penalty discount rate. All those things could be
done, assuming you can get the legislation for some of them. In any
event, if we could work in that direction, then I think we'd have
Of course, one of
something that would really be very useful to us.
the things we would want to analyze is what this might do to shortterm market rates, and I don't think we have a good handle on that.
Most people think they would fluctuate a lot more; my instincts tell
me that the private market would take care of that. And, even if they
fluctuated more, I don't believe that would be transmitted to longterm rates to the extent that most people seem to be assuming. In any
case, if we could use this as an operating variable instead of
borrowed reserves, or the federal funds rate, or whatever people think
it is we're using, I think it would be a very efficient way to try to
achieve the very thing that Tom is advocating. Now, if it came down
to a vote as to whether to do what he suggested or not do it, I would
say do what he has suggested. I'd like to take it further than that,
but I think it's better than what we now have, because it is a
constraint. And we really don't have many constraints now, given our
willingness to violate our target ranges on an ad hoc, judgmental,

-25-

5/17/88

basis. And I'd like a little more of a rule in there, a little more
of a road map than we have, to the extent we can do it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Angell.

MR. ANGELL. I'm very appreciative of the fact that there are
so many members of this Committee who place price level stability in
such high regard that they want to find some way to accomplish that
[objective].
This proposal, it seems to me, is somewhat deficient in
that regard in that it does not have within it a proposal that, in a
sense, gets you to price level stability. I guess I see it as a way
to live with 5 percent or 4 percent inflation, because 4 percent
inflation can occur while maintaining this kind of constraint, so-MR. MELZER. Wayne, those numbers are simply for the sake of
example. What I've laid out is a framework. I think it would be up
to the Committee to set the bands, so that's quite-MR. ANGELL. Yes. Second, even though I call myself a
monetarist, I've always been a discretionary monetarist. And I
believe that there are some circumstances--anyone who has read Irving
Fisher, I think, would be aware of the fact that once you begin
targeting money, and you cause money to be more scarce than it
otherwise would be, you can alter the expected rate of inflation. And
when you do, you get a shift in the demand for money. Now, it seems
to me, that's exactly what occurred in 1986, with the worldwide
deflation in commodity prices led by the plunging price of oil.
Certainly, many of us were mindful of the fact that during that period
of time we were getting some extreme numbers. And I remember in July,
August, and September of that year looking very carefully at the
commodity prices, which had turned around, and saying that we ought to
put more restraint in place. And yet there were some who felt--and I
think quite rightly so--that those countries with balance of trade
surpluses were not engaging in action that was sufficient in regard to
the survivability of the third world. And we thought it was
essential, in some ways, to push the Bank of Japan and the Bundesbank
to more expansionary programs. And we did this, with some risk, which
made it necessary for us to follow a very different course of monetary
policy in 1987. And there were those who were the strict rulemakers
who told us at that point in time how disastrous it was going to be.
Now, as it turns out, it wasn't disastrous for us to follow a very low
growth path for the monetary base during 1987.
It turns out that that
seems to have been exactly the right thing to have done. So, I really
can't find myself in a rulemaking camp versus a discretion camp. If
you want to be discretionary, then you have to ask yourself what you
want to use for discretion. And I've made it very clear that
commodity prices are very good signals in regard to money growth
rates.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

You have indeed.

Mr. Vice Chairman.

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. Well, I probably have more sympathy
for this, at this point, than I did the last time we talked but-MR. STERN.

That's not saying a lot!

VICE CHAIRMAN CORRIGAN. [Unintelligible] a storm going on
here because my thinking is probably conditioned by my worries that we

5/17/88

-26-

could be making a horrible mistake in monetary policy here.
I do have
trouble, as I said before, with the base on a kind of intellectual
But
level. A number of comments have been made on technical issues.
leaving those somewhat technical issues aside, I think what Tom is
suggesting here is that there ought to be something--whether or not it
has to be precisely this--something that makes us say "Hey, wait a
minute" in a very, very deliberate, aggressive, forceful way. And
that's what I have more and more sympathy with, even though I must
confess I can't really warm up to this particular proposal, for
somewhat technical reasons.
There are two systematic periods, using
One
the numbers that Tom has picked, in which this thing went astray.
was in the early 1980s, and the other one, which Governor Angell was
Now, as Frank Morris pointed out,
just talking about, was in 1986.
the Committee was aware that everything, including the base, was in
the one case growing very slowly, and in the other case, growing very
rapidly. But the Committee made a conscious decision--not focusing on
the base itself, but on other things that in some sense are
symptomatic of the base--to ignore those. Why did they make that
In the
I think the answer is, in a sense, quite simple.
decision?
early 1980s, despite the fact that we were in what turns out to have
been a hell of a recession, we also still had very high inflation
rates.
In other words, the adjustment in the inflation process, while
There
underway, was by no means finished and by no means locked in.
was still some concern that the inflationary momentum of the late
1970s, 1980 and 1981, was still a demon that didn't have to just be
And so there was, I think, a
wounded, but had to be stomped out.
conscious decision to be tolerant of those shortfalls.
The same was
more or less true in 1986, in that the very rapid growth in the base
and the other aggregates was in some sense tolerated because, among
other things, the inflation rate, while certainly not zero, was low,
partly for oil price reasons, and certainly not rising. And that
leads me to the view that if a procedure like this were to have some
functional utility, that utility might arise in a context in which
there was some kind of a relationship between it and what, in fact,
was going on with regard to inflation. Now, I don't want to get into
the rules game, either way. But it's clearly one thing if the
monetary base, or some other monetary measure, is outside of some
range and the inflation rate is high and/or rising, as opposed to a
situation where it's outside and the inflation rate is low and/or
falling. At least in my mind's eye, if something like this were to
have some utility in a policy framework, either implicitly or
otherwise, somehow or other you would need to take it one step
further.
MR. MELZER. Jerry, on those situations you commented on, I
would just observe that those clearly would be situations, under the
way this has been articulated, where the Committee could decide to
And I think in
violate it, and simply be obligated to explain it.
both cases-MR. ANGELL. But what would be the money market response if
the money market knows that we have these guidelines and then we
decide to violate them? Don't you think there would be an
expectational impact upon the money market?
MR. MELZER.
I think there could be, Wayne. But I think
we're talking about a fairly extraordinary period--only two situations
in eight years that might require that.

-27-

5/17/88

MR. ANGELL. Yes, but you see, by March or April of 1986, or
by May at least, I presume we already were running up against that
constraint. And if the marketplace had seen that out there, then the
path of interest rates in April and May would have been affected by
market expectations of the fact that that was there.
It would
MR. MELZER. Well, in a sense, I think that's good.
cause the Committee to think very carefully about whether or not we
If we do, consciously, then we explain it.
ought to be violating it.
Right now when we violate a monetary growth range, we get into
explanations of velocity. I just don't think that that is something
It just sounds like
that is bought by the public on a broad basis.
you are talking your way around the issue with technical phrases and
so forth.
MR. ANGELL.

Well, not to the target range;

I think that's

right.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Governor Johnson.

MR. JOHNSON. Well, as others have said, I sympathize with
If we had a vote today on the price
the goal that Tom's seeking.
I'm not
stability goal, we'd probably get a much larger consensus.
sure if anybody wants to take that, but I think it's critical that-MR. MORRIS.

We would have voted differently today.

MR. JOHNSON. Well, what I was going to follow up with is
that there's a much more difficult technical issue. Even if you agree
on the goal--if we had 100 percent consensus that price stability is
what we all wanted, and I think probably almost everybody would say
that today--you'd still have a whole lot of disagreement about what
that means. Agreeing on the goal is an important first step, but then
you'd run into all kinds of problems, like: Does that mean that we
If
should jump with both feet on every big relative price swing?
there's an oil price shock, which is one big relative price in the
economy obviously as it flows through, it's going to have some
It might have a
temporary effects. But what do we mean by temporary?
two-year effect on the price level as it works its way through. What
Does that mean every time one big
are we going to do about that?
relative price shocks the general price level on a temporary basis
We would get into all
that we run out there and stomp it to death?
kinds of discussions about timing, about what price stability means,
and what we would accept in the form of relative price effects that
could affect the general price level for a while. But if you run out
and try to deal with every relative price effect--like import prices,
which we've obviously agreed to absorb to some extent--what are you
going to do?
If you deal with every one of those, you're going to be
If you tighten up against a relative
chasing your tail, I think.
price shock, then you're going to potentially overshoot; as that
filters through the economy, then it's going to create an overreaction
on the downside at some point, and then you're going to be trying to
work it back up.
So, to me, price stability means a long-run concept. And
that may mean that you're never actually experiencing a perfect level
It has to
of price stability where prices are hovering around zero.
mean that the mean is somewhat around zero; but even then you'd have

5/17/88

-28-

to admit that you want to accept periods of deflation. And I guess we
could debate whether people think we ought to go through periods of
deflation in order to keep the mean around zero.
You can get into all
kinds of difficult debates about what the proper measure of price
stability is.
Is it a broad index such as the CPI, PPI, the deflator?
What is it?
It's a difficult problem. But I still think that a goal
of price stability, rather than, say, trying to improve the
unemployment rate or maximize real output growth, is a step in the
right direction.
I think there was a time, probably, when that wasn't
clear; some people would have said there was a Phillip's curve trade
off and some acceptance of permanent inflation was worthwhile.
I
don't think that's true anymore, but I still think there is a
difficult problem.
Before I get too hung up on the goals, I do want to say on
this specific proposal, though, that I think it would succeed in
damping the volatility of the base. Having upper and lower bounds or
constraints, I think, would cause monetary policy to adjust early as
you're approaching the bounds rather than deal with big roller coaster
effects, and would probably damp the volatility of the base growth.
You'd have a much more stable growth in the base; I think it would
succeed in that.
But the question would be whether that gets you
anything.
I think the ultimate issue as to whether this specific
proposal would be worthwhile rests on whether the base is a better
instrument of intermediate policy than any other aggregate or anything
else we have. Don had indicated that the statistical properties of
the base make it somewhat equivalent to M2, although Bob Parry's
people debate that.
My view is that even if you look at M2, you have
serious money demand problems associated with M2.
My big problem is
that I am not convinced that money demand is stable, even in the long
run.
Look at what we have experienced over the 1980s. And there have
been statistical studies in the past that have found long-run breaks
in the trend in the money demand in the postwar period. All you have
to do is look back earlier than the postwar period; there were decades
when monetary velocity was actually on a declining trend.
It only
turned up in the postwar period. And there have been several detected
structural breaks in it even since the postwar era. Nobody can
predict when those breaks will occur, and that's the difficult
problem. You can feel very satisfied about the statistical properties
of the base and all of a sudden there could be some structural
adjustment--a long-term adjustment in the trend rate.
Even though it
may stabilize around this new trend rate, you might go two years
trying to detect it.
So, I think there is this fundamental problem
with monetary aggregates. But, in saying that, I think the goal of
people who want to target the monetary aggregates is a highly
desirable one. That's why my preference has been to try and look at
indicators like the interest spread, in conjunction with commodity
prices and exchange rates.
These are financial market indicators but
they provide a similar type of goal to what people wanting to target
the aggregates would want.
I'm interested in the interest rate spread
because I think that, especially under our operating procedure, that's
how money is created and that's how liquidity is provided to the
system.
It's basically the spread between the funds rate and other
rates that creates the lending incentives that take place, and of
course, that determines, to some extent, the expansionary effects of
money.
It creates additional credit in the markets and that feeds
back on the base.
The way we do it now, we change the funds rate
through the borrowing target, which changes the interest rate spread,

5/17/88

-29-

which creates new loans and feeds back on the base through reserves.
And, you know, I think that that gives you some idea about the thrust
of policy.
I think that approach-MR. HOSKINS. But don't
constraint you'd get a different
think the yield curve would look
markets were operating with this
the point.
MR. JOHNSON.

you think that if you had a
shape in the yield curve?
Do you
the same as it does now if the
constraint in mind?
I think that's

Yes.

MR. HOSKINS.
And that's clear information. The market is
going to behave differently if it knows that constraint is there in
terms of long-MR. JOHNSON. Sure.
I guess all I would say is that, yes,
the yield curve might change.
Obviously, as you got close to the
constraint, long-term rate movements would probably be damped.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I think Lee is raising the point that if
the market believed what we were doing, the long-term rates would be
hence, the yield spread would tend to be tilted differently
lower;
from what it would otherwise be, to say the least.
MR. HOSKINS.
constraint.

If they believed that the base was a real

MR. JOHNSON.
It could, but I think still the question is
You know, you can get all kinds
going to be whether that aggregate--.
of yield curve relationships associated with that. You might get much
better behavior on the long end of the market.
But it's not hard to
get long bonds to behave well. We could run the fed funds rate up to
20 percent today and I can assure you we'd get very good performance
on the long end of the market.
I think it's pretty predictable; if
you create expectations of a recession, you can invert the yield curve
quite nicely. But I don't think that's the ultimate goal, unless what
you want is a level of expansion consistent with price stability-whatever that is, exactly.
I don't know exactly what yield curve
determines that, but it's not a negative slope.
It might be close to
flat but who knows exactly.
I don't know where that leaves me, except
that it requires a lot of discretion at the moment.
It really
requires filtering a lot of information. I think getting the goal
right, and maybe even having further debate on fleshing out these
goals, would allow this process to work even better. You're always
going to have differing opinions when you have 19 people sitting
around a table.
But I've been amazed at how well this process sort of
filters all that information into a pretty good consensus.
So where
do we need to go?
If we could get the goals down a little better, we
would probably do all right.
MR. MELZER. One thing I'd say, Manley, is that there's no
way around it: our business is money--whether we like it or not and no
matter how difficult it is.
And I think people would generally agree
that inflation is a monetary phenomenon.

MR. JOHNSON.

I don't disagree with that either.

-30-

5/17/88

MR. MELZER. And, finally, I think in our discussion at the
last meeting, people who have had a lot of experience around this
table kind of spelled out the difficulties we have if we view our
business as being one of interest rates and don't have some kind of a
counterbalance based in money and reserves.
To do that just because
of the inherent opportunities-MR. JOHNSON. What I'm saying is that it's a proxy; that's
always been the intermediate target to get to price stability, or
whatever the goal was. Money growth isn't an end in itself; it's only
an intermediate step toward what your ultimate goal is.
I'm just
saying that there are a lot of potential intermediate approaches to
use to achieve the same end result.
If we all have the same end
result, we could have a slightly different view about what the
intermediate steps ought to be but still reach a consensus on policy
that would probably make us all happy. The base would probably
perform better; my own indicators would perform better; Wayne's
commodity prices would perform better.
I think we would all generally
be happier.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Boehne.

MR. BOEHNE.
I think most of the useful things that can be
said about this really quite excellent paper have been said.
My
bottom line is that I'd like to find a rule that would keep us on
track in terms of good policy.
I don't know what that rule is.
I
don't think the base is it, largely for the same reasons that I think
M1 is not it.
That doesn't mean we shouldn't keep working at it.
But
I don't have enough confidence in this to give up much discretion at
So, whatever we would like, I think it simply
all in terms of policy.
isn't a reality; so I think we have to continue much as we have been.
MR. BLACK. Even if you could find a perfect rule, I doubt
the Committee would vote for it, because it's so much more fun making
ad hoc decisions every time.
MR. MELZER.

And that hurts again.

MR. KELLEY.

It means you recognize what you saw.

MR. BLACK. I mean I'm assuming away that problem;
think we would vote for discretion.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

I still

Governor Kelley.

MR. KELLEY. Tom, let me ask you to comment on something a
bit more mundane and workaday. I think how we employ a device such as
this has a lot to do with whether or not it's useful in the first
place. And I wonder how we could reliably use it without so diluting
it that it becomes punchless. As I look back four quarters, and also
include the current quarter, I notice that the first month in four out
of the five quarters grossly exceeds the parameters on the upside.
Then are those-MR. MELZER.

Where are you looking?

MR. KELLEY. Well, I have a chart here that the Board's staff
puts out on annualized growth rates on a month-by-month basis; it

5/17/88

-31-

doesn't go back very far but it does go back a year; and it includes
April, so I'm taking the liberty of including this quarter. For some
reason--and maybe there is a reason--[monetary growth in] the first
month of each quarter, four out of the five times, is way over the
parameter. On both sides of the first months, there are much lower
figures. And I ask myself what we would do if we [were operating
under] your proposal.
It says that no quarter would be permitted
either to exceed the upper limit or fall below the lower limit. Well,
in four of the last five quarters--taking the liberty of including
this one--you have a huge number in the first month, which kind of
comes out of the blue, because it follows two much lower months, and
then in turn, is followed by two much lower months.
And I ask myself
what would we be liable to do if we sat down at this table when we
just got a brand new figure that was way over [the upper limit] in the
light of the pattern we have seen here in the last year or so.
How
could we protect ourselves against that phenomenon?
MR. MELZER. What the proposal envisions is the average
growth rate for the next quarter from the prior quarter's average.
Are you looking at growth rates, Mike?
MR. KELLEY.

Yes.

So, first of all, what would the first
MR. MELZER. Okay.
month in one of those quarters you were talking about imply in terms
of level for the average of the quarter?
MR. HELLER. Yes, Mike is saying you look at the first month,
but then you're really-MR. MELZER.
are right now.

Well, let me put it in the context of where we

MR. KELLEY. If you look at the first month, it's like the
kind of thing that Peter deals with every day, with regard to the
maintenance period. For instance, let's take October: the October
number was 11 percent on an annualized basis.
It was followed by
November at 6.9 percent and December at 3.1 percent; it averages out
fine.
But if we had sat down here and looked at that 11 percent in
October we might have been moved to do something precipitous.
MR. MELZER. Well, first of all, I think the staff would have
some ability to project what they expected to happen in terms of the
growth [vis-a-vis] what we were trying to hit as an average for the
quarter. There could be a circumstance where it would require some
response reasonably early in the quarter.
If you look at where we are
right now in this quarter, we are probably right at, or preciously
close to, the level that would be permitted by a 9 percent upward
bound.
MR. KELLEY.

April was 12.3 percent.

MR. MELZER. Okay. But you just can't look at the monthly
growth rates; I think you have to look at the level. And, if I looked
at these correctly--I'm looking at the St. Louis base--we are roughly
at where I think a 9 percent constraint would be, or a little below
it.
So, you would have to be asking yourself at a meeting like this:
Should I be taking a step now to slow that thing down?

5/17/88

-32-

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Then what happens on July 1st?
In other
words, suppose you take a specific action that drives it down.
MR. MELZER.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. All constraints legally come off as of
the beginning of the next quarter?
MR. MELZER.

Right.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Wouldn't you really want more of a
rolling three-month average rather than an actual quarterly system?
A
quarterly system works very much like the maintenance period, where
you could end up at the end of the period with some crazy stuff going
on.
MR. MELZER.
I guess to the extent I thought about that part
of it, I've just been looking at the average for one quarter in
relation to the average for the next.
I would think you could do it
well.
MR. KELLEY. That wasn't meant as a criticism, just as a
problem you have to work through if it's going to be useful.
MR. MELZER.

Yes.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

President Stern.

MR. STERN. I have some considerable sympathy for this
proposal, but I don't think we ought to ask too much of it, in the
sense that I don't think it's going to accomplish something that is
always going to have us do the right thing. But the merit I see in
it, relative to current procedures, is that it does put the monetary
aggregates back into the policy process--in my judgment, in a more
meaningful way.
I think it adds some automaticity to our response
relative to the current process, at least at the extremes, and I think
that's important. Maybe that's the same thing. The third point I
would make is that, under some circumstances, I think it will make us
less reactive and more anticipatory. And for those reasons, I think
that this, at the least, merits a more serious consideration.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
who hasn't yet?
MS. SEGER.

Anyone else who wishes to make a comment

I just have one question.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

Sure.

I read these papers with great interest. Would
MS. SEGER.
In other
it be possible to run something like this off the shelf?
words, not publicly announce that we're going to change, but act
internally here as if we were trying it for six months, and just sort
of simulate what the decision-making process would be?
MR. MELZER.
Sure.
possible, wouldn't you Don?

I would think that would be quite
Not to make decisions--

5/17/88

[We could try it] between now and, say, the end
MS. SEGER.
of the year or something like that; and if it did turn out to have
real working potential, then put it in the Humphrey-Hawkins [report]
next February.
MR. JOHNSON. The problem is you would never get the market's
response to the changes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.

That's what makes it tough to do.

MR. JOHNSON. The behavioral adjustments that would take
place are not there that way.
MR. HOSKINS.
I think Martha raises a good point.
give us a chance to take a peek at it when--

It would

MS. SEGER. It's better than looking backwards, which is what
you're doing statistically
MR. HOSKINS.
MR. JOHNSON.
with a decision.
MS.

SEGER.

You're right.
You could at least see when you would be faced

Yes.

MR. HOSKINS. You would be losing half the power. The power
is the market's response to this rule, or this constraint, or
That's the power
governor, or band, or whatever you want to call it.
of it.
MR. FORRESTAL. Well, wouldn't we be better off to test it
just for a while, before locking ourselves into a statutory
I think that makes a lot of sense.
requirement or market expectation?
MS. SEGER.

Well, it's just an idea.

MR. BLACK. But, at a minimum, you have to tell the
[Congressional] Committee next time in the Humphrey-Hawkins
[testimony] that we have either rejected it, or we are looking at it
and have not yet decided whether to accept it.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
I was sitting here keeping score.
did marginally better than the Orioles, but not much.
MR. HOSKINS.
brought it up!

Tom

But he did a lot better than when he first

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. However, I also kept score on the
general sympathy for what it is you're trying to do. And I get the
impression that what we're looking for here is more something to keep
us off the path of an inadvertent acceleration of inflation.
If
that's the case, then what we haven't done yet is to evaluate some
particular vehicles that would give us that sort of indication; that's
the issue Jerry really was raising. Can I suggest that at this
particular stage we rephrase the problem, not as a Tom Melzer issue,
but as an FOMC issue. Let's see whether or not we can look not at the
usual targeting characteristics, but strictly at the inflation

-34-

5/17/88

question. To give you an example: if the long-term income velocity of
M2 doesn't show any significant secular trends, it means, effectively,
that the GNP price level, the implicit deflator, is a close function
of unit money supply defined in M2.
If you go further and substitute
capacity for real GNP, and cyclically adjust the price--if you can
actually get that--what you're basically trying to do is to get a
relationship between, say, M2 divided by capacity on the one hand--or
a bit more exactly, that as a long-term indicator of price, and the
inflation rate being the first difference. But, if we could get some
general notion--it doesn't have to be on a monthly basis, but just as
a basic thrust--I think it would capture some of the issues that we're
grasping for. Heaven knows, I think we are all acutely aware that
chasing interest rates, ultimately, is going to throw us off the cliff
at the end. And, while there is no real strong support for Tom on
this issue, I think starting from where he started and expanding from
there may get us something that we might find particularly useful.
Now, I just suggest that. Does anybody have any notions as to where
we go from here, granting that we don't like this specific proposal?
MR. BLACK.
I think you're right, Mr. Chairman; that's the
way I viewed it.
I tried to take it a little farther in the direction
that I thought it ought to go, which nobody else will agree with
except maybe Tom Melzer and Lee Hoskins.
I think that can be very
productive.
MR. MELZER.
I think there's an advantage to having something
in that type of equation that relates to what we do day-to-day in
carrying out monetary policy.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, yes; but remember if we have M2 in
that equation, which is what would be in the one I was using, for
example, that's really suggesting the nature of the noninflationary M2
target.
It's a target which basically diverts itself from nominal GNP
and gets away from the business cycle.
It's basically looking at the
long-term targets of policy which we view as noninflationary.
I think
we all know from our analytical work that the relationship between
price and money has been a very tough one to grab.
In fact, we have
created such huge lags between money and prices that it gets you to
wondering whether you're leading the next cycle or lagging the
previous one. And I think that creates difficulties.
If we have some
longer-term thrust, at least we know where we're going out of line for
two years.
I don't think we can target any less than that.
MR. BLACK.
I would like to see us use multiple-year targets,
if we can ever get to the point that we could agree on that.
I think
it's an exciting step.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, does anyone have any objection to
asking Don to see whether or not he can put his people to work?
If
anyone has any other thoughts to throw in the hopper, it might be
useful.
MR. ANGELL. Well, Tom, would you object to paying more
precise attention to M2 right now?
Is there anyone here who believes
that 8 percent growth of M2 is consistent with our price level
stability goals?
MR. JOHNSON.

Yes, I do;

I think it might be.

-35-

5/17/88

MR. BLACK. I don't--not in the long run. I think it's the
best predictor of inflation of any of the aggregates we have now.
MR. JOHNSON. I don't know.
what's happening on the demand side.

I mean, you have to tell me

I cannot tell you.

MR. ANGELL.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
is flat, then you're--

The question is if M2 velocity secularly

MR. JOHNSON. If you make that assumption, I agree with you
completely. But I'm saying that's one hell of a big "if", because
that's not what it has been doing the last few years.
MR. BLACK.

It hasn't been too far from that.

MR. JOHNSON.

Well, it has been a long way from zero.

MR. KOHN. You have to go over a long period of time and you
still get zero but-MR. JOHNSON.
MR. KOHN.

Yes, if you go back--

Over a period of eight years it has been

substantial--

MR. MORRIS. But the problem is that the character of M2 has
changed quite dramatically in recent years.
MR. JOHNSON.

No doubt about it.

MR. MORRIS. It used to be that M2 paid a below-market rate.
Now it pays a market rate. And there is no way that you can take the
old data on M2 and come up with any conclusions that will permit you
to forecast the M2/GNP relationship in the future.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
criticism.

Regrettably, that is a legitimate

MR. KOHN. Except that our equations on M2 aren't doing that
badly once we take into account the opportunity cost changes.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, why don't we take a shot at it;
and we will report back to you and see where we go from there.
MR. KOHN.
MR. BLACK.

Any and all inputs from Reserve Banks-You want to implicate us!

MR. JOHNSON. Don, since when has it been doing better?
It's been what--a few quarters, right?
MR. KOHN.
MR. HELLER.

No, no.
But the demand for money has gone through--

5/17/88

-36-

MR. KOHN. The demand equation, once it takes account of the
interest rate changes, hasn't been that far off over the last several
years.
But the velocity changes-MR. JOHNSON. Can you predict the interest rate movements?
Because if you can't, you're in big trouble.
MR. KOHN.

That's the problem, which is what we said--

MR. JOHNSON.
forecasting.

It just gets you into interest rate

MR. BLACK.
If you can predict the prices, do you need to
predict the interest rates?
That's why I'm
That's my whole point.
MR. JOHNSON. No.
saying I've been looking at these other indicators that seem to do a
better job than prices.
MR. BLACK.
I don't always understand these things, but
weakly I'd suggest that it is a pretty darn good predictor of the
price level.
CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN. Well, can I terminate this conversation
now, and just suggest that we will report back?
If we don't, we're
going to break all records on the length of an FOMC meeting.
MR. MORRIS.

I'd say we won't break 1979, Mr. Chairman.

MR. ANGELL.

October 6th.

MR. JOHNSON.
MS. SEGER.

How long did that one last?
Probably three days.

CHAIRMAN GREENSPAN.
into our luncheon session.

Do we have some lunch?
END OF MEETING

We can now go

